FOURTH SERIES VOL. 76 N0. 13
14 FEBRUARY, 2012

PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES
OFFICIAL REPORT
TUESDAY, 14 FEBRUARY, 2012

CONTENTS

VOTES AND PROCEEDINGS AND THE OFFICIAL REPORT- [Col. 895]

STATEMENTS -
Valentine’s/Chocolate Day -- [Col. 896]

PAPERS -- 

i) Addendum to the Master Facility Agreement between GoG and the China Development Bank (CDB) - [Col. 900]

ii) Local Government (Ketu South Municipal Assembly)(Establishment) Instrument, 2012 (L.I. 2075) - [Col. 907]

iii)Local Government(Tolon District Assembly)(Establishment) Instrument, 2012 (L.I.2097) - [Col.907]

CONSIDERATION STAGE OF BILLS-
Presidential (Transition) Bill, 2010 - [Col. 908]

ADJOURNMENT --- [Col. 964]

Correction of errors of substance may be made only on the floor of the House with the permission of
the Speaker. However, correction of typographical or grammatical errors which Members suggest for
the Bound Volumes which will be compiled at the end of the Meeting may be clearly marked in the Daily
Report and the copy containing the corrections must be received at the Editor's Office, Parliament
House, not later than four clear days after the publication of the Daily Report.

BOUND VOLUMES of Debates (with comprehensive Index) are issued periodically during the Session. There is no fixed subscription rate, but prices will be quoted and standing orders entered on
application.

Printed by Department of Official Report
Parliament House, Accra

I4 February, 2012 , 

THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC 
OF GHANA

FIRST MEETING, 2012 

Tuesday, 14th February, 2012

The House met at 10.40 a.m.

[MADAM SPEAKER IN THE CHAIR]

PRAYERS

Votes and Proceedings and the
Official Report

Madam Speaker: Hon Members,
Correction of Votes and Proceedings of
Friday, 10th February, 2012. 

Page 111-

Mr Joseph Y. Chireh: Madam
Speaker, I am sorry to turn you back.

But if you look at item 7 on page 7, it is
indicated that the Hon Majority Chief
Whip informed the House- Madam
Speaker, he did not just inform the House,
he presented the Business Statement to
the House for us to adopt. He did not
inform us. So it should be captured that
the Business Statement was presented to
the House instead of he informing us.

Madam Speaker: So, it should be
captured as presented to the House?

All right. 

. Page 11... 2O-[Pause.]

Hon Members, the Votes and
Proceedings of Friday, 10th February, 2012
as corrected are adopted as the true record
of proceedings. 

 Hon Members, we have the Official
Report of Thursday, 9th February, 2012.

Any corrections? 

Hon Members, in the absence of any
corrections, the Official Report of
Thursday, 9th February 2012 is adopted as
the true record of proceedings.

Dr A. A. Osei: Madam Speaker, I crave
your indulgence -- I have a slight
correction to the Official Report of
Thursday, 9th February, 2012.

Madam Speaker: What paragraph?
Dr. A.A- Osei: Madam Speaker,column
753, my second intervention, it reads as
follows:

"Page 13 in today's…"

There is something missing. It should
be:

". . . in today’s Order Paper..."

Madam Speaker: All right.

In which case, may I then change and
say that the Official Report of Thursday,
9th February, 2012 as corrected represents
the true record of proceedings.

Hon Members, I have admitted a
Statement from Hon Justice Joe Appiah,
Member of Parliament (MP) for Ablekuma
North.

10.50 am

 STATEMENTS

Valentine’s /Chocolate Day

Mr Justice Joe Appiah (NPP ---
Ablekuma North): Madam Speaker, it is
that time of the year again, when all lovers,
friends and relations look forward to being
showered with gifts of appreciation from
their loved ones and, it is with a feeling of
deep concern and great sorrow that I rise
to make a few pertinent observations in
respect of the celebration of Valentine’s
Day in Ghana these days. -

[MR APPIAH]

Madam Speaker, Valentine’s Day which
falls on February 14, every year, is a much
awaiting day all over the world, and
Ghana is no exception to this anticipation.
Although the genesis of this celebration
began with the naming of a day after one
early Christian martyr named Valentine,
and was established by Pope Gelasius I
in 500 AD, it was later deleted from the
Roman calendar of saints in 1969 by Pope
Paul VI, yet its religious observance was
still permitted, and has become a tradition
through which lovers express their love
for each other.

Madam Speaker, some years back, on
the Ghanaian scene, my observation to
this celebration was the wearing of red
outfit, which was used as a sign of
recognition. However, with time, the trend
died out, bringing some relief to many
who opposed the idea.

The patriotism of Valentine’s Day was
named "Chocolate Day" some years back
and when it began, it was welcomed with
enthusiasm, and chocolate became the
order of the day during this fetish
celebration. However, with the increase
in chocolate prices, one may ask if the
chocolate idea will be encouraged.

It would have been interesting if the
Cocoa Production Company reduced the
prices of chocolate just for this occasion,
to enable as many people as possible
enjoy a bar of chocolate.

Madam Speaker, with the advent of
Valentine’s Day becoming Chocolate Day
in Ghana, it was assumed that the cost
incurred previously such as promiscuity
and licentiousness became so widespread
that no one had the gumption to call the
participants to order and eventually
marriages ended up on rocks as the
Winsome young girls attracted and
mesmerised married men into having affairs
with them and breaking their homes on
account of Valentine’s Day celebration.

Madam Speaker, in some instances,
hotels are fully booked just to celebrate
Valentine’s Day. I hope and pray that this
time, the celebration would be done
cautiously and without any immoral
attachment to it. 

Madam Speaker, with the high
prevalence of the obnoxious HIV/AIDS
globally, it would be appreciated if in the
observation of this promising day, the
various electronic media will sensitise
listeners more on chocolates and educate
the youth.

However, Madam Speaker, I would want
before I resume my seat, to wish all a Happy
Valentine’s Day and Chocolate Day.

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

Mr Isaac Osei (NPP - Subin):
Madam Speaker, I thank you for the
opportunity to contribute to the
Statement, which has been ably delivered
by Hon Justice Joe Appiah (Member for
Ablekuma North), calling our attention to
the significance of Valentine’s Day and
its observance.

Permit me, Madam Speaker, however,
to make a few comments. 

My view is that, Valentine’s Day or
National Chocolate Day should be seen
first as a day to show love and affection
to those who are nearest and dearest to
us. 

Secondly, it is my view that it is also a
day to show care and love to those who
may not be as privileged as we are. So
today, let us spare a thought for the
physically challenged, for those who are
in hospitals, for those who are suffering
mental illness and for those who are living
with HIV/AIDS. l believe that it should
not be a day for bucaneerian orgies or
sexism but rather it should be a day for
sober reflection. The country has decided
to call it National Chocolate Day since, I
believe, 2006, during the time Hon Jake
Obetsebi-Lamptey was Minister for
Tourism.

Madam Speaker, I think this is good
and the whole idea was that cocoa being
our principal crop, we should find ways
to promote it. However, we know that in
Ghana, as in some of the producing
countries, cocoa consumption in various
forms only accounts for about three to
five per cent of total production.

I do not agree with the Hon Member
who made the Statement when he says
that the Cocoa Processing Company
should reduce its prices for the occasion.
My view is that Ghanaians should support
the only production company which is
engaged in tertiary processing of our
cocoa.

But I join the Hon Member in wishing
all Ghanaians a happy Valentine’s Day and
also National Chocolate Day.

Madam Speaker, I thank you for the
opportunity to make these few comments.

Madam Speaker: Thank you, Hon
Member.

Hon Members, this is the end of
Statement time.

Shall we move on to commencement of
Public Business?

 Yes Deputy Majority Leader, laying of
Papers Minister for Local Government and
Rural Development, item 4 (a) (i).

Alhaji Abdul-Rashid Pelpuo: Madam
Speaker, the Deputy Minister for Local
Government and rural Development is on
his way coming, and as a result, I would
want to request that we defer item 4 (a)
and take item 4 (b). If that is acceptable,
I would request your permission and the
indulgence of my Hon Friends on the
other side of the House to allow the
Deputy Minister for Finance and
Economic Planning to lay the Paper on
behalf of the Minister for Finance and
Economic Planning.

Madam Speaker: Deputy Leader, you
want us to defer item 4 (a) (i) and (ii)?

Alhaji Pelpuo: That is so, Madam
Speaker.

Madam Speaker: What about (b)?

Alhaji Pelpuo: So We can go on to (b).

With your permission, the Deputy
Minister may lay the Paper.

Mr Osei Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: It is
all right. 

PAPERS .

By the Deputy Minister for Finance and
Economic Planning (Mr Seth Terkpeh)
(on behalf of the Minister for Finance and
Economic Planning) -

Addendum to the Master Facility
Agreement between the Government of
the Republic of Ghana and the China
development Bank (CDB) for a loan of
US$3.0 billion to finance infrastructure
development projects under the Ghana
Shared Growth and Development Agenda
(GSGDA). 

Referred to the joint Committee on
Finance and Poverty Reduction Strategy.

Dr A. A. Osei: Madam Speaker, the
first one was referred to the joint
Committee on Finance and Poverty
Reduction Strategy and not Mines and
Energy.

Madam Speaker: Did we not turn it?

Dr A. A. Osei: No. This is the Master
Facility Agreement. This is not the
Subsidiary Agreement. It was referred to
the joint Committee on Finance and
Poverty Reduction Strategy.

11.00 am

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Madam
Speaker, the Hon Member for Old Tafo,
who is the Ranking Member is drawing
attention that the referral of this, originally,
was made to the joint Committee on
Finance and Poverty Reduction Strategy.

I think we did that for convenience.
The case being that this is really a multi -
faceted Agreement and it covers several
areas. For want of the appropriate
committee, we made the referral to the
Committee on Poverty Reduction Strategy
with the view that because it touches on
so many areas, that could be a central
committee to rub shoulders with the
Finance Committee to deal with this.

Maybe until we come to establishing
our own committee, which you have often
spoken about, the Committee on Economic
Planning, for instance, which perhaps,
could be the most appropriate committee
to consider this matter, we have to make
do with this.

But having said that, Madam Speaker,
the Subsidiary Agreement is now before
the Committee and they are considering it
with the Committee on Mines and Energy
-- the Offtaker Agreement. This really is
the Master Facility Agreement and we
should deal with this as a matter of
principle before we come to deal with the
Subsidiary Agreement.

So I would appeal to the joint
Committee, to which this has been referred
that they should deal expeditiously with
this to enable us have the way paved, to
enable the joint Committee, that is the
Committee on Finance and Mines and
Energy to consider the subsidiary
Agreement and the Offtaker Agreement;
other than that, that one cannot precede
the one that has been laid before us to day.
This is the Master Facility Agreement and
this one should take precedence over the
one before the Committee.

Mr James K. Avedzi: Madam Speaker,
inasmuch as I agree with the Minority
Leader, I would want to suggest that we
can do this concurrently. We have gone
so far in the Subsidiary Agreement on the
Gas Infrastructure and we have even
scheduled a meeting today at 12.00 noon.

So I agree with him that this would take
precedence over the Subsidiary
Agreement. But we can also continue and
look at that Agreement. But before that
report is tabled, we would have done
with this Addendum before the - The
Addendum does not actually affect the
terms of the Master Facility Agreement.

But I agree with him that we would go
that line.

Dr A. A. Osei: Madam Speaker, my
Chairman is pleading for us to work
concurrently.

Firstly, I do not believe it is possible to
work concurrently because the joint
Finance Committee and Poverty
Reduction Committee is not the same as
the Finance Committee and Mines and
Energy.

But more importantly, Madam Speaker,
we are talking about the Master Facility
Agreement which has been previously
approved by Parliament and now, it has
been changed. That is the crux of the
problem. . It would not be wise for this
Parliament, in my humble opinion, to ignore
that. It is in ‘our interest to quickly come
back to this House, approve the changes
in the Master Facility Agreement to have
the space to continue to do the Offtaker
Agreement because both the Offtaker
Agreement and the Subsidiary Agreement
presume that there is a Master Facility
Agreement.

As of now, it is not what we have and
we should not dismiss that at all. This
House would do itself a favour if it directs
the joint Committee on Finance and
Poverty Reduction Strategy to quickly
go and meet, look at the amendments,
bring a report to the House, so that we
can feel ourselves clear to look at the
Off-taker Agreement.

In fact, Madam Speaker, one of the
changes involves the definition of the Offtaker 
Agreement. How can we go and look
at the Off-taker Agreement whose
definition has changed and that is not
approved by Parliament? It is not just a
small matter.

So my advice would be that, let the
Committee on Poverty Reduction Strategy -
or we should be directed to meet, quickly
consider that report, and come back to this
House, so that this House can approve of
the amendments. 

Then when we are doing the Offtaker
Agreement, we know what it is. This is
because that change, we should not
presume that Parliament would -

In fact, Madam Speaker, I am sure we
would have a debate on the definition
because it is not an immaterial definition,
and I think it would not be wise for us to
presume that the House would approve
of the amendments. Supposing the House
does not approve them, what do we do? I
think we should do the proper thing, so
that this House, in 20 years to come, we
should be seen to have been doing the
right thing and not because we want to
hasten to approve it.

Mr Joe Ghartey -- rose -

Madam Speaker: Is it on the same
issue?

Mr Joe Ghartey: Madam Speaker,
what has occurred raises the question or
the debate whether the House should
approve signed Agreements or the House
should approve draft Agreements.
Madam Speaker, the House has tried both
methods, so to speak, and both methods
have raised their own problems.

Madam Speaker, if you look at article
181(1) of the Constitution, and with your
permission, I beg to quote:

"(1) Parliament may, by a resolution
supported by the votes of a
majority of all the Members of
Parliament, authorise the
Government to enter into an
agreement for the granting of a loan
out of any public fund or public
account.

(2)An agreement entered into under
clause (1) of this article shall be laid
before Parliament and shall not come
into operation unless it is approved
by a resolution. of Parliament."

It is because of article 181(5) which
talks about the necessary modifications
when we are dealing with international
business or economic transactions that
We read the two previous articles we have
read.

Madam Speaker, there have been times
in the past where Parliament has approved
an Agreement. It happened in the case of
the Vodafone Agreement. The difficulty
that we faced then was that after it had
been approved by Parliament, Members
of Parliament raised concerns about the
Agreement -- legitimate concerns I dare
say - and it was taken into consideration

The matter was referred back to the
Committee and then it took account of
those concerns, did an addendum and it
was brought back to Parliament for its
approval.

Madam Speaker, there have also been
times in the past where Parliament had
approved a draft and when there were
changes, the changes were also brought
back.

The underlying principle is that the
final document that is going to bind the
people of Ghana must be approved by
Parliament. So whether you bring the
Agreement firstt and there are changes,
you have got to bring the addendum. If
you bring a draft and what you signed is
not the same as the draft, you have to
resubmit the new document.

So the long and short of the matter,
Madam Speaker, is that I support my Hon
Colleague (Dr Akoto Osei) who spoke
last. It is a very simple matter. If the
Committee considers the changes, brings
it back to Parliament, then we can quickly
consider it and approve it. That is the
neatest way that I believe, with the
greatest of respect, is the constitutional
way. 

Mr Avedzi: Madam Speaker, I do not
think that anybody here is contesting that
position; that is the position we have also
taken. But what I am saying is that we
have already scheduled a meeting today
on the Subsidiary Agreement where we
have invited the Executive and the officers
to come.

So if that is the case, then it means
that today’s meeting ~- that is the
meeting of the joint Committee on
Finance and Mines and Energy, and
Defence and Interior should rather be
changed to Committee on Finance and
Poverty Reduction Strategy, so that we
look at this addendum, come out with
the report tomorrow and then continue
with the meetings with the Committee
on Defence and Interior and the rest.
That would be the best way to go.

Madam Speaker: Yes, I think you are
right; do it that way. That is the
constitutional way; that is the approved
way. We cannot deal with a matter which
has not been approved by discussing it
at the same time. So you are right.
Whether you schedule it or you cancel it
to bring another committee, yes, do it the
way you have suggested, so that we
finish with one and then move on quickly.
The idea is to save time. I think you
wanted to save time but this can be done
quickly without doing it simultaneously.
So I agree.

ll.l0am.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Madam
Speaker, I understand the difficulty of the
Chairman of the Finance Committee. The
Paper was scheduled to be laid today and
thereafter, you were going to make a
direction as to the referral. Not until that
is made, they cannot schedule a meeting.
So I understand the difficulty that the
Committee has.

Notwithstanding, we should also abide
by the principle. But because this is an
amended version of the Master Facility
Agreement, we cannot have a situation
where as you indicated to us, consider
the two alongside. It cannot be done that
way, to the extent that there are material
and substantive changes in the
Agreement.

So, yes, we may agree that we
reschedule the meeting of the earlier joint
Committee, the one advertised, and have
the meeting with the Committee on
Poverty Reduction Strategy. If it is possible
to touch base with the Hon Members, they
can then have the meeting today to
consider it. Once they go through the
Motions and Report, then we can quickly
deal with the other one since he said they
had travelled some distance considering
that one. But in principle, this certainly
must precede that one. 

Madam Speaker: Yes, I think it is
resolved. We do this one first and then
move on to the second one.

Alhaji Pelpuo: Madam Speaker, that
being settled, I would request that we go
back to item 4 (a) (i) and (ii) because the
Hon Deputy Minister for Local
Government and Rural Development is
now here. His Hon Minister has asked him
to come and lay the Paper on his behalf
and I would want to ask permission so
that we can allow him to lay it with the
indulgence of my Hon Colleagues.

Madam Speaker: Hon Minority
Leader, do we allow the Hon Deputy
Minister to lay it?

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu -- [Nodded].

Madam Speaker: Hon Deputy
Minister, I think you have permission to
lay the Papers. 

By the Deputy Minister for Local
Government and Rural Development (on
behalf of the Minister for Local
Government and Rural Development)-

(i) Local Government (Ketu South
Municipal Assembly) (Establishment)
instrument,20l2 (L.I.2075).

(ii) Local Government (Tolon District
Assembly) . (Establishment)
Instrument, 2012 (L.I. 2097).

Referred to the joint Committee on
Subsidiary Legislation and Local
Government and Rural Development.

Madam Speaker: Yes, Hon Majority
Leader, we move to item 5 . Is it?

Hon Members, the Hon Second
Deputy Speaker will continue with the
Consideration Stage-- [Pause]

11.15A.M.--

[MR SECOND DEPUTY SPEAKER IN THE
CHAIR]

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, Presidential (Transition) Bill,
2010 at the Consideration Stage.

BILLS - CONSIDERATION STAGE
Presidential (Transition) Bill, 2010
[Resumption of debate from 08-02-
2012]

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Chairman of the Committee, have you
reached some consensus on clause 5?

Chairman of the Committee (Mr
Emmanuel K. Bandua: We have not met
to discuss it. But I have a suggestion to
make that if it will be possible, we define
what "eminent" means in the
interpretation clause and then we move
on. I do not know; we have not met on it
but that is --
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Chairman, we prefer that this winnowing
and consensus building is taken very
seriously so that we make progress on
these matters. --

Mr Bandua: All right

Clause 6 -- Handing over Notes.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, there is no listed amendment
for clause 6 and it is for the consideration
of the House. 

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
I think we have done some amendments
with respect to clause 6 and I think the
Question was put on that one earlier. It is
not as if no amendments have been done.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: So, that
means we have concluded clause 6 and
amended it? It stands part of the Bill.

Clause 7 -Availability of the handing
over notes

Mr Kwabena Okyere Darko-Mensah:
Mr Speaker, I beg to move, clause 7,
subclause (2), paragraph (b), sub-
paragraph (i), delete "the Speaker" and
substitute "Parliament".

Mr Speaker, like I said the last time, I
believe that if the Report is submitted to
Parliament, then we are sure it will end up
on the floor of the House. But when we
make it in the form of ending up at the
Speaker’s desk, then it will be at the
discretion of the Speaker whether it ends
up with Hon Members or not, more so,
when the information that will be
contained in the Report will be very
germane to a lot of Hon Members and
when we are going to demand the 30 days
before an election.

I believe that it is very critical that Hon
Members of the House, the peoples’
representatives have copies of the Report.
That was Why I proposed that we change
"Speaker" to "Parliament".

Mr Bandua: I think I support the
amendment- That will conform with
paragraph (b), subparagraphs (ii) and (iv).

Mr Ghartey: Mr Speaker, I do not know
I can urge the Hon Member who moved
the amendment to consider a friendly
amendment. Mr. Speaker, that friendly
amendment is in the nature of the deletion
of "Council of State". Mr Speaker, I say
that because the President-elect
represents the Executive, Parliament
represents the Legislature, then the Chief
Justice-- perhaps, if we are using
Parliament, "then we should ‘say the
Judiciary, then the Judiciary is
represented, the three arms of Government
are represented and one copy goes to
National Archives.

So, just thinking on my feet, I wonder
the merit or the reasons we added
"Council of State". It is not an arm of
Government. '

It is not an arm of the State and when
you look at level of Statehood, then we
are dealing with the three main arms: the
Executive, the Legislature and the
Judiciary, with one copy to the National
Archives. ' .

I wonder why and what the Council of
State is doing there? And perhaps, if it is
not sticking out like a sore thumb. 

 One can think of manyother bodies
like the National House of Chiefs, one can
think of the Commission on Human
Rights and Administrative Justice
(CHRAJ), one can give one to the
Electoral Commission. There are several
other constitutional independent bodies
that are of the same rank, they are pari
passu, so to speak, with the Council of
State. But these three institutions are arms
of Government. So I Wonder- It is not a
definite thing that I feel that I can -~

11.20am

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon Joe
Ghartey, after that rare submission, what
do you suggest?

Mr Ghartey: Mr Speaker, I would
suggest a deletion of the Council of State
in subparagraph (iii) and I would suggest
a substitution of the Chief Justice with
the Judiciary in line with what was
proposed by my Hon Friend, Mr Kwabena
Darko-Mensah when he said, instead of
the "Speaker", we should say
"Parliament"; so instead of the "Chief
Justice" we should say the "Judiciary"
and then I suggest also a deletion of the
"Council of State".

Mr Darko~Mensah: Mr Speaker, I
believe that if you look at the other
amendment I proposed, that is for clause
(7), I have already made proposal for the
substitution of "Justices" for "the
Judiciary." So I believe that it is in line
with-

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: So that
would come in, anyway.

But what about reference to the Council
of State? 

Mr Darko-Mensahz: Mr Speaker, I
believe that even though he has made that
submission, the Council of State is
regarded more or less in certain quarters
like the second chamber of Parliament and
I believe that giving them a copy of the
Report will not actually harm anybody. If
you are looking at adding an additional
list, like the Electoral Commission, National
House of Chiefs, I believe that we cannot
belabour it; we can always give them a
copy.

I think that maybe, we should rather
add the National House of Chiefs instead
of deleting the "Council of State". I believe
that the National House of Chiefs would
be appropriate if we can just add it.

Mr Bandua: Mr Speaker, I think that
the Council of State, by virtue of the fact
that they are in a unique position, they
advise the Presidency. So I think there is
nothing wrong bringing them in here. So
I do not see why we should delete it. If we
want "to add more, I do not see the
relevance, unless we are able to justify it.
But for the Council of State, I do not think
it creates any harm if we leave it in there.

Mr. Joseph Yieleh Chireh: Mr Speaker,
what he is saying about the Council of
State, the proposers of the Bill gave
reasons; the Council of State is the one
that counsels the President. So they
should be given a copy of these handing
over notes. It would be a record for them.
So if a new Council comes, they would
have the notes to be able to counsel
whoever it is that they are dealing with.
Indeed, it is so innocuous that if you look
at it, it would also show that we have four
places apart from the National Archives
where you can find this. So I think we
should accept it because they have a role
to play in governance and that is why they
are included. 

It must be important that we include
them because they have a role and they
can counsel the President; they can also
look at the previous notes, whichever
Council is in place and see how they
modify whatever it is. I support that this
should be included, it should not be
omitted as he is suggesting.

If you talk about the Judiciaiy, whether
you say the Judiciary or not, we all know,
the head of the Judiciary is the Chief
Justice, unless you are saying that they
should go and hand it over to the
occupant as Chief Justice. No. Once you
say Chief Justice, it is the office, unless
you want us to say the Judicial Secretary,
which is also not the issue. The issue is
that you can say "Judiciary" because you
say "Council of State", it does not really
matter.

But the important thing is that you
would know who is head of the Judiciary;
whether you mention his or her name or
not, or title or not, we know where the
thing is going. So in both cases, I think
my Hon Friend just wants to argue a bit.

Mr Ghatey: Mr Speaker, I got up
because listening to the sentiments of my
Hon Colleague, I would not belabour the
point. I was going to even spare him his
labours. I know my Hon Friend also
wants to argue a little. So the Council of
State thing, I abandon it. Mr Speaker, I
will not belabour the point; it does not
spoil anything; it does not detract from
anything.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Then we
still have for clause 7 (ii), delete
"Speaker", substitute "Parliament",

Mr Cletus A. Avoka: Mr Speaker, I
would humbly want to urge Hon Members
to allow the original rendition in the Bill
with respect of the institutions or the
persons to remain. Mr Speaker, we should
look at the intendment of this law. If you
talk about the Speaker, the Speaker is the
Leader of the august House of Parliament.
So the purpose is, where can we send this
document, the handing over documents
to an institution, so that they can remain
there and people can have access by way
of request if they want to find out some
information?

So you do not just say "Parliament".
If it comes to Parliament, is it going to
remain in the library; is it going to remain
in the Information, Communication and
Technology (ICT) department; is it going
to be in one of the Leader’s offices or
what? So the Speaker is the appropriate
forum for matters pertaining to Parliament
to be brought to.

Similarly, if you talk about the Judiciary,
the Chief Justice is the epitome of the
Judiciary. It should be sent to the Chief
Justice. It is not the Chief Justice’s
personal document or copy, but it is meant
to be kept there for the benefit of all of us
in this country. If you are a lawyer, a judge
and you think that you have no access to
the document from the Speaker’s Office,
you can get it from the Office of the Chief
Justice.

So I do not think that this means that
they are individually responsible for these
things; they are meant for the institutions,
but which institutions are headed by
these title holders. So I think we should
maintain the Speaker, we should maintain
the Chief Justice, the Council of State and
then the National Archives. That would
be in furtherance of the intendment of this
law; rather than talk about Parliament.
When you say, bring it to Parliament, they
would be confused. When they come to
Parliament, where do they go to? Is it the
Clerk to Parliament; is it the Liberian,
who else?

But if it goes to the Speaker, the
Speaker would know where she would
keep it, and anybody who is interested
can have access to it. So I would humbly
submit that the intention is where it is safe
to have these documents, so that people
belonging to these fields and other
Ghanaians can have access to them. So
we should maintain these names rather
than just put an office there: "Judiciary".
It does not solve any problem; it does not
assist us in any way.

Mr William O. Boafo: Mr Speaker, a
careful look at the provision appears to
establish some consistency. Previous
references are not to institutions, but to
offices, like Regional Ministers, Deputy
Regional Ministers and Ministers. And
even, if you come to clause (7) (1), the
original is not to be given to the Office of
the President, but it is to be given to the
President.

Mr Speaker, I think it is in order that we
retain the Speaker and the Chief Justice
because it is more consistent with the
previous arrangement, recognizing offices
rather than institutions.

Mr Speaker, we would want to avoid
the situation where an occupant of the
office who should accept responsibility
for what has happened, who should not
disclaim knowledge of what has
happened, would say that the thing was
sent to an institution and it never came to
my office, so I do not know anything
about it. This is another mischief which
we would like to avoid.

So Mr Speaker, I would support the
original rendition in the Bill.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: The
point being canvassed on both sides is
that we want to ensure responsibility and
that those who receive it can be held
personally and officially accountable for
the document in the future.

11.30 a.m. 

Mr Joseph B. Aidoo: Mr. Speaker, if it
is a question of removing any doubt about
the institution that would receive the
copies of the Report, then I would
propose that in the case of the Speaker,
we add the "Office of the Speaker". In the
case of the Chief Justice, we add the
"Office of the Chief Justice", so that we
are very sure that the document is going
to that particular office. But of course, I
support the original rendition that the
Speaker, the Chief Justice and so on and
so forth -

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Very
well. 

In line with the position taken by the
Hon Majority Leader and Hon Boafo -

Mr J. B. Aidoo: Exactly so. So if  we
want to qualifyit more, then we just add
the "Office"; that is, the "Office of the
Speaker", the "Office ofthe Chief Justice".
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Yes, the
last word, then we move on with the
amendment, then we put the Question -

Mr Darko-Mensah: Mr Speaker, I
strongly believe that we need to go with
the amendment. If we take all the reports
that are actually being handled by State
institutions, they are actually presented
to Parliament.

Recently, I remember when the issue
about the letter from the President about
his absence from the country was given
to Madam Speaker, she made it clear that
the letter, according to the Constitution,
is supposed to come to her. And therefore,
announcing it was at her discretion. I
believe that we have to be careful that
such an important report from the
transition team should be at the discretion
of anybody in this country. It is supposed
to be a public document. And as a
country, we are also trying to promote
freedom of information. 

I believe that the people’s representatives
should have a copy without it being at
the discretion of any other person. I
therefore, propose that we should go with
this amendment that instead of being the
"Speaker", it should be "Parliament".

When it is Parliament and it gets to
Madam Speaker, there would be
responsibility because you cannot just
write "Parliament"; you would always
address it to a responsible office in
Parliament, And therefore, if you address
it as "Madam Speaker, this is the report",
the report will end up on the floor of the
House and it is very important. And when
it comes, it is presented here. 

So I do not see why we should keep to
"Madam Speaker" or the "Chief Justice".
At least, if it goes to that institution, we
would know where to write the letter to
and we would know how the distribution
would be done.

When documents are coming to
Parliament, we know how they are
distributed in Parliament and I do not think
there should be any difficulty for Hon
Members to accept that we need to make
it "Parliament" instead of "The Speaker"
or "The Chief Justice". Otherwise, the
"Council of State", does it mean that it
has to go to only the Chairman of the
Council of State? No! I do not believe so.
So I believe we have to make it according
to the institution and those sending those
reports would appropriately address them.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker:Thank
you very much.

Yes, Chairman of the Committee, final
word. 
Mr Bandua: Mr Speaker, if you look at
subparagraphs (iii) and (iv), the offices -
- the Council of State and the National
Archives" -- and they have not been
addressed to the head of the institutions.
So we may have to look at that and ensure
that there is some uniformity. There should
be some uniformity because in sub-
paragraph (iii), we have the Council of
State and not the Chairman of the Council
of State and then in subparagraph (iv),
we have the National Archives and not
the head of the institution.

So there should be uniformity. I would
not mind if we make it uniform. So that if
we should have institutions, we would
have institutions throughout and if we
have heads of institutions, it should be
heads of institutions throughout.

That is my observation, MrSpeaker.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: I will put
the Question.
Alhaji Pelpuo -rose-

Mr. Second Deputy Speaker: I think we
have had quite an exhaustive debate on
this matter

Hon Deputy Majority Leader, I
recognize you.

Alhaji Pelpuo: Mr Speaker, I just
wanted to identify a differentiation
between sending it to the Speaker and
sending it to Parlilament. If it is to the
Speaker, he/she will handle it
administratively because it is a letter
coming from outside to him or her. He or
she will decide to handle it
administrative1y--refer it to the Clerk and
then they will decide to put it anywhere,
But if it is to Parliament, it belongs to the
institution and that everybody associated
with the institution, the stakeholders are
all to be aware that it is lodged.
So when you say "Chief Justice", she
can just make reference to the Registrar
and that is it. But if it is to the Judiciary,
then she would be compelled to share it.
So we have to understand the distinction
between the two before we vote on it.

Dr Anthony A. Osei - rose -

Mr Second Deputy Speaker:Thank
you very much. I will put the Question.

Hon Dr Osei, I recognize you from the
other side as the last word -

Dr A. A. Osei: Mr Speaker, Hon Darko-
Mensah talked about consistency. The
Hon Majority got up and said that it was
all right to leave the "Speaker" and the
"Chief Justice". But when it comes to the
Council of State, it is not addressed to the
Chairman; it is not consistent. It could be
taken to any person in the Council of State.
But it is the same logic. 

So if we want to be consistent, then we
must accept the amendment. It is only
consistent with what it is here. Otherwise,
it should be the Chairman of the Council
of State and whoever heads the National
Archives for consistency.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Very
well "

Question put and amendment agreed
to.

Mr Avoka -rose-
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Majority Leader, do you want to take a
step further to my ruling? Then we would
proceed, I do not mind. 

Mr Avoka: Mr Speaker, I thought the
voting was so close that if you took a
second - [Laughter] - Well, with due
respect, I thought that the shouting was
such that it was very difficult to easily
discern the AYES and the NOES -

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: It was not
dificult for me. The AYES had it; the
amendment is carried.

Clause 7, further amendment standing
in the name of Hon Darko-Mensah --

Mr Darko-Mensah: Mr Speaker, I beg
to move, clause 7,, subclause (2),
paragraph (b), subparagraph (ii), delete
"Chief Justice" and substitute "Judiciary".
This is to conform with what we have
already. 

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, it is virtually consequential, I
will put the Question.

Alhaji Pelpuo: Mr Speaker, it does
appear to me that we did not have enough
discussion on this matter before the
voting is taking place. So may I suggest
that even though we have voted on the
two, because we are at the Consideration
Stage where flexibility is allowed, we step
this matter down until we have more
exhaustive discussion on it.

11.40 am.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Deputy Majority Leader, you will agree
with me that if it is a matter of exhaustive
debate, we really have had it and so much,
so that when got up, when I said I was
going to put the Question, I nevertheless
allowed - and any other Hon Member who
had not contributed was given a further
chance.

In the circtunstances, under Standing
Order 113, I will call for a division because
the voice vote is not clear. But if that is
what Hon Members wish over this small
matter, then we will call for a division; we
will call for a headcount. If Hon Members
feel it is a matter over which we should
have a headcount, so do I because I
honestly cannot make a determination on
the voice vote and that is what the rule
says.

The Leadership should co-operate, so
that we proceed accordingly.
Standing Order 113 (1):
"When the Question has been put
by Mr. Speaker at the conclusion of
the debate, the votes shall be taken
by voices "Aye" and "No",
provided that Mr. Speaker may in
his discretion instead of declaring
the result on the voice votes call for
a headcount." '

So let us call for a headcount and close
the matter. '

Hon Majority Leader, do you want to -

Mr Avoka: Mr Speaker, I wanted to
draw your attention with due respect to
Standing Order 113 (2) and it says:
"A Member may call for headcount
or division if the opinion of Mr.
Speaker on the voice vote is
challenged." 

To the best of my knowledge, no Hon
Member has called for it yet.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: This is
because I have not determined the matter.
I have not pronounced on "Ayes" having
one or "Noes" having one and the rules
allow me before I make a pronouncement,
to proceed the way I am proceeding, very
much in line with the rules.

Question put and the House counted:

AYES - 38
NOBS - 41
ABSTENTIONS -

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: The
amendment is lost.

I will put the Question on the entire
clause -

Mr Dery: Mr Speaker, I just wanted,
with permission, to draw your attention
to a very important point.

We do not raise quorum when we are
dealing with legislative matters. But when
you have taken a vote and the total
showed that you do not have a quorum, it
could be a problem. I just wanted to go
on record, that depending on the numbers,
it is not advisable sometimes to take
headcount. You could defer it and then
we deal with it later. But if you have
already done it and clearly, the total shows
that there is no quorum, then what you
have taken is not binding.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: As of
now, we do not know those who
abstained- Let us make progress.

Papa Owusu-Ankomah: Mr Speaker,
clause 7, we have the National Archives.
That is not the designation; it is Public
Records and Archives Administration. So
if that could be corrected.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move, clause 7
subclause (2), paragraph (b),
subparagraph (iv),substitute "Public
Records and Archives Administration" in
place of the National Archives as it
appears on clause7 (2) (b) (iv).

Mr Chireh: Mr Speaker, I support the
amendment I think that it should be carried
because that is the new name.

Question put and amendment agreed
to.

Clause 7 as amended ordered to stand
part of the Bill.

Clause 8 --- Presidential Estates Unit

Mr Bandua: Mr Speaker, I beg to move,
clause 8, subclause (1), paragraph (a), line
1, delete "procure, in accordance with the
Public Procurement Act, 2003 (Act 663),
secure" and insert "take". -

Mr Speaker, the reason for this
amendment is to separate the taking of
inventory from the procurement of the
assets. That is the rationale for this
amendment. ’We want to separate the two.

11.50 am.

Alhaji H. Iddrisu: Mr Speaker, I
would request the Chairman of
the Committee to give further
particulars why he even thinks that
he should make reference to the Public
Procurement Act. I think all
institutions of State are required to
uphold the laws that are passed by
this august House. Are we going to
say that every entity that we create,
we must necessarily say that subject
to Public Procurement Act?
Once there is an Act which governs
and supports the procurement process in
this country, we need not make specific
reference to it.

Mr Bandua: I do not think you have
listened to my amendment -

Mr Second" Deputy Speaker: Hon
Chairman of the Committee, you may make
your point, addressing -

Mr Bandua: I do not see the relevance
of the point he is raising. If it goes on --
first, we have tried to separate it -so the
Procurement Act does not come here at
all. We have removed it from that section.
So I do not know why he is raising this
issue.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: I think
the Hon Minister‘s point is, do you need
to mention, "in accordance with Public
Procurement Act" at all? This is because
we should abide by the law anyway and if
so, are we in all such laws going to be
mentioning "in accordance with Public
Procurement Act"? That is a point I think
we must please -

Mr Bandua: When an Act applies
rightly in a situation, I think there is
nothing right mentioning -

Mr J. B. Aidoo: Mr Speaker, I do not
know what the Chairman is doing. This is
because the essence of the amendment
as has been proposed by the Committee
is to remove that phrase starting from:
"procure in accordance with the Public
Procurement Act. . ." So that the rendition
will read,
"to take, secure and keep an
inventory of the assets and
properties of Government which are
assets and properties not vested in
the Lands Commission established
under article 258 of the
Constitution".

So in this case, "Public Procurement"
-, and all those aspects do not come in
at all. 

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: So that--

Prof. Gyan-Baffour: l think the
Chairman made it very clear that he is
trying to do that to, take away
"procurement" from this Presidential
Estate Unit. So they do not have the right
to procure. If they cannot procure, why
do you talk about procurement law? ls that
not the issue? That is the issue.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Where
"procure" means purchasing or Where
"procure" means obtaining. I would want
us to address our minds to it. Where
"procure" may mean obtaining something
and that one, no procurement law comes
in. We may not necessarily have to take
away "procure" but depending upon what
the intendment of the word "procure"
here is, if it is to obtain something Without
necessarily going to purchase
something--

Mr Avoka: Mr Speaker, just like my.
Colleagues, the last Hon Member has
indicated, the provision of the Public
Procurement Act, 2003 in this Bill is
misplaced. This is a transition team. They
are intended to take assets o the
Presidency, so that the new President who
comes in knows what he is inheriting.
They are not supposed to procure and
advertise or selective tendering and
procure anythingfor the benefit of the
presidential estate. No.

They are supposed to take inventory
of the items, so that when the President
takes over, then he has a list of items he is
inheriting. When he is leaving office, they
know what he left behind. That is the
intention and therefore, the provision here
of Public Procurement Act is misplaced.
So at the winnowing committee, we
made the amendment, that "take, secure
and keep an inventory" -- They are "to
take, secure and keep inventory" of the
rest of them. They are not supposed to
procure anything --

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Majority Leader, the amendment is
intended to do what-

Order! Order!

Mr Avoka: We are to delete from (a) to
"procure in accordance with the Public
Procurement Act, 2003, (Act 663)." We
delete all that and then we insert "to take",
as provided for in amendment, "secure
and keep an inventory". That is the
intendment. To take the property that is
in place. To take custody of the assets -
- like you are going into a new bungalow,
you take custody of what is there.

This team is not supposed to buy
anything in accordance with this
Procurement Act. They are buying
nothing; they are procuring nothing.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Thank
you.

Dr A. A. Osei: Mr Speaker, I would
have agreed with the Majority Leader except
-- [Interruptions] -- the Chairman of
the Committee, in the next amendment,
talks about procurement -
[Interruptions] The Majority Leader
should avdert his mind to - he says the
object is not to procure but in the next
amendment, the Committee is asking them
to procure. So his statement cannot be
correct. I accept the Chairman’s first
amendment except the next one, I have
difficulties with.

Mr Chireh: Mr Speaker, the first
amendment is correct, in the sense that
you are taking inventory and securing the
assets. That is one.

The idea of introducing procurement
as a function for the Presidential Estates
Unit is something that I do not want us to
put in this law. This is because, one, what
we want to do is that each Ministry or
department that provides assets to officers
is a basic thing that they do. _

Now, unless you are talking about the
transitional team which is only for you to
budget for the day of handing over, the
ceremonies connected with that, we
should not clothe this Administrator-
General with any powers to procurement.
Because each agency already procures for
the officers that will be taken account of.
So if the Chairman agrees, he should
not even move the Motion for
procurement at all. It is not necessary and
it is appointed by the President for the
purpose for which any procurement under
the presidency can be done for the
purpose of this office.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, I will come over to you. Hon
Members, if you take notice, the Hon
Majority Leader, I think consciously
introduced the word "take" and I think
that is in place of "procure". So he wants
us to have ‘ftake, secure and keep" an
inventory.

Hon Majority Leader, I am sure you said
that with an intention? 

The Hon Majority Leader
unfortunately is not with me. That "take,
secure and keep" and to'avoid some of
the possible trappings of that word
"procure" which in a way, has become a
term of art-

Hon Papa Owusu-Ankomah -rose-

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Papa Owusu-Ankomah, were you the last
but one contributor? Hon Akosua Frema
Osei-Opare, then I come to - »

Papa Owusu-Ankomah: Thank you
very much, Mr Speaker-

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: No. Hon
Osei-Opare, then I come to you.
I see your back, Hon Papa Owusu-
Ankomah. You do not see what is
happening at your back.

Mrs Akosua Frema Osei-Opare: Mr
Speaker, I have a big problem with the
establishment of this whole unit in the
way it has been couched. If we are looking

[MRS OSEI-OPARE]
at a Presidential (Transition) Bill, we are
looking at transfer of power, State and
whatever to the next Government. If we
want to recommend that it will be useful
to have such an establishment in the
Presidency which I subscribed. I do not
really believe that it belongs to this law.

12.00 noon

This Bill should be looking at the unit
so established under whatever Act; the
unit should be able to give a record to the
next Government as to what we have and
what we do not have. As it has been
couched, it looks like we are now
establishing a unit which would now
begin to purchase, sell and to take
inventory; that does not belong to a
Transition Bill.

The Bill here should do a transfer of
that estate or whatever to the next
Government. So this particular unit which
I think, by looking at the content, is useful,
does not belong here, it belongs to
another. '

I think we should look into our laws
and begin to establish what units should
go under the Presidency. But certainly, it
cannot be part of a transition. The
transition is about accountability, it is
about that estate actually handing over
the records that they have at the end of
the Government to the next Government._

That is what a transition Bill should
seek to do. It is not to establish a unit to
be able to procure and do other things
how can that be a transition? This is an
ongoing role that we want to give.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I believe that this
clause, we must take a very serious view
of it. This does not really belong here;
that unit should be established under
another Act but the purpose should be
that there must be a record that they hand
over to the next Government.

So Mr Speaker, I think we should not
be creating a unit to be buying, keeping
an inventory and so on under a transition
Bill. A transition Bill is a hand over process
of what you have been doing to the next
Government, so that they know what they
have and not what you are doing yourself.
So please, let us take a serious view of
this because I believe we are in the wrong
track

Alhaji Haruna Iddrisu: Mr Speaker, I
believe we can make progress if the
Chairman of the Committee can assure us
that having regard - [Interruption] - even
though I know that our rules would not
permit that - I agree With some aspects
of the argument that the Presidential
Estates Unit has no business doing
procurement. Theirs is just to oversee an
asset inventory and nothing more. In any
case, even if they are to engage -
[Interruption]

Dr A. A. Osei: Mr Speaker, on a point
of order.

Mr Speaker, during the Second
Reading, we went through all that the Hon
Minister is talking about. Mr Speaker, look
at the memorandum, we are here
considering the amendments and he is
taking us back to the object of the Bill. Mr
Speaker, if you look at (xi), during the
Second Reading, we debated all those
matters.

We have moved beyond that; he
cannot take us back. It is stated here that
it is responsible for the procurement,
management and transfer. It is here; we
have gone through that. Mr Speaker, I
think they are slowing the progress -

Alhaji H. Iddrisu: Mr Speaker, mine is
that the Chairman should just assure us
that having regard to the first amendment
he has moved, supported by the "Hon
Majority Leader which the Hon Member
for Amenfi East (Mr J. B. Aidoo) said that
we should delete those words starting
from "procure" and put in "take". That is
appropriate, but we must be assured that
the second part of his amendment would
be abandoned-and we know that there is
no exercise which has to do with
procurement, then we can make progress.

Papa Owusu-Ankomah: Mr Speaker,
I believe the Committee did not take
cognizance of the memorandum to this Bill
in proposing the amendment that is, delete
"procure". Mr Speaker, if you look at the
memorandum-pages (x) and (xi) and with
your permission, I beg to read. The last
paragraph of page (x) says:
"The Presidential Estates Unit is
established as a continuing office
and does not terminate with the
termination of the transition. It is
responsible for the procurement,
management and transfer . . ."

So "procurement" is a major part of the
unit’s work. If you look at the previous
paragraph, it says - if you look at the
entire clause 8 of the memorandtun -
[Interruption] - particularly, the last
sentence, it says and with your
permission, I beg to quote:
"The problem arises because the
Unit and its head operate under the
authority of the Minister for Water
Resources, Works and Housing, so
when that Minister is part of the
Government transiting out of office,
the Unit still has to look up to the
Minister for instructions."
This clause deals with the problem by
establishing the Presidential Estates Unit,
an independent institution of State under
the Administrator~General . . .

So it is supposed to replace the Prestige
Unit of the Public Works Department of the
Ministry of Water Resources, Works and
Housing. So really, what this Bill seeks to
do is to say that henceforth, the Public
Works Department Prestige Unit should
not be responsible for the procurement of
the assets of the Executive but rather the
Presidential Estates Unit. 

So, I believe the Committee -
[lnterruption] -- may not have
considered the memorandum in detail
before proposing this amendment. So
really, "to procure" is relevant and should
be part of this amendment.
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, this is a very critical stage of
this Consideration Stage and I believe we
should -

Some Hon Members -- rose-

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Order!
Order!

Hon Members, please, take your seats.
Hon Members at the back, please, take
your seats, so that we can seriously
participate in this.

If it is the object of the Bill that there
should be a permanent institution, we
must address our minds there accordingly.
It states "The Presidential Estates Unit is
established as continuing office and does
not terminate. . ."

So that Members would really address
themselves as to -- [Interruptions]

I am afraid, Hon Members, we need to
pay attention, so that we know exactly
what we want and translate it into the Bill.
And I want Hon Members to please,
address their minds to this important
matter, so that procurement and other
matters, whatever we really intend, should
be reflected in the law.

Mr Kwame Osei-Prempeh: Mr
Speaker, after careful reading of the
memorandum, I believe there is no need
for that amendment. Mr Speaker, I believe
that my Friends, the Hon Member for
Ayawaso West Wuogon (Mrs Frema Osei-
Opare) and the Hon Minister for
Communications (Alhaji Haiuna Iddrisu)
fell into a trap that it was part of the
transition team and therefore, it would go
with the transition. I believe it is the same
trap that the Committee fell in. But the unit
is being established as a permanent unit
and part of its functions will be to procure.

Mr Speaker, I believe the Committee
itself is satisfied. This is because the
subsequent amendment talks about
procurement by the unit and if they are
going to establish the procurement
function in another clause, why delete it
from this place?
Mr Speaker, I believe that the unit being
established, a permanent one to procure,
take and manage asset belonging to
Government, so that no executive arm will
be doing that. It is _a permanent unit and
therefore, there is no need to disturb that
clause and my Hon Friend should
withdraw the amendment and let us make
some progress.

12.10 pm.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: I will
call the Chairman of the Committee -

Mr Bandua: Mr Speaker--

Mr Second Deputy Speaker;
Chairman not yet.

Hon Boafo.

Mr Wifliam Ofori Boafo: Mr Speaker,
the factors which motivated the
Committee to make this amendment are to
ensure - [Interruption]

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Order!
Hon Members, I will suggest we take
our seats and consider this matter very,
very seriously.

In fact, I allowed some references to
the two amendments because of the fact
that we need to look at this matter in a
very holistic manner before we are misled.
So if you will please resume your seats
and have some order. Hon Boafo
continue.

Mr Boafo: Mr Speaker, it was the
desire of the Committee and even at the
winnowing level, to ensure that the
transition team does not dabble in
procurement. That is why the Committee
is proposing that we take the entire
opening phrase and substitute "take".
Mr Speaker, the point is that, if there is
the necessity to have a "Presidential
Estates Unit", I think this particular
legislation is not the place where it should
be. We accept the principle that there
should be a "Presidential Estates Unit"
but it should not be in this legislation.
The proper place that it should belong to,
will be the Office of the President Act,
where these structures are set out in the
Act. It should not be here.
The essence of the transition team is
to take inventory and after they have taken
-the inventory, to make their
recommendations and hand it over to the
"Presidential Estates Unit" for
management and control and for
everything. It is not for them to -
[Interruption]

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, Order!

Mr Boafo; Mr Speaker, we have been
told in this House, it has been hammered
in this House, that we should not ignore
the Memorandum. How should we
constitute ourselves by the Memorandum
if we feel that what is in the Act is not
good? We do not have to bind ourselves
by What is in the Memorandum. That is
the essence of the Bill being brought to
this House for us to take the process and
ensure that we make good laws here. So
if the Memorandum is misdirecting us to
establish a "Presidential Estates Unit" by
this Presidential Transition Act, Mr
Speaker, we are not bound to look at it.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Boafo, you would want to submit
emphatically not with an "it" but then it is
your view that so far as this paragraph is
concerned in the Memorandum, it is
misleading and it should not be reflected
in the law?
Mr Boafo: Precisely so, Mr Speaker. If
you look at the Memorandum, apart from
the fact that it is saying that the Committee
is going to be a permanent office, it goes
on to elaborate the role of the "Presidential
Estates Unit" should be a permanent unit,
it goes on to elaborate what it should do
in the Memorandum. And what it should
do in the Memorandum is not reflected in
the Bill. It says that:
"The officials of the Unit are to be
responsible for the maintenance of
the register of the executive assets
of State".
Then it says:
"Additionally, the Unit is
empowered to make budgetary
allocation to cover the cost of
transitions and inaugurations. . ."
Mr Speaker, in the alternative, if they
want us to maintain this "Presidential
Estates Unit" in this Bill, then the
provision here regarding the Presidential
Unit is insuficient. My contention is that,
it should not be in this Bill, it should go to
the ofice of the President Act.
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bo nsu: Mr Speaker,
what the Hon Member for Akropong is
indicating to us is a completely different
thing. If the argument is that, the
provisions under clause 8 are insufficient
and we need to expand same, that is a
different ball game.
Now, what the Chairman seeks to do
by this amendment of subclause I is that,
we want to distinguish between the
submission of an inventory to the
incoming Administration from other
statutory functions involving
procurement which the Chairman has now
captured in subclause (5). Mr Speaker,
that is the import of what the Chairman
and the winnowing committee has done.
So, I would entreat my Hon Colleagues
to understand it from that point of View
that we want by, one; to establish what
they must be doing in the transition
period, taking inventory, submitting same,
accounting to the incoming
Administration, the inventory of the
assets available to the presidency. That
is what the Chairman seeks to do with that
amendment in clause 8 (1). _
Mr Speaker, he goes further to suggest
that we incorporate a new subclause in
clause 8 (5) captured under (v).I think
the proper place for it and of course, that
will be subject to the directions of the
draftspersons, would be that,_ it should
follow after clause 8 (1) so that we will
have that one as 8 (2) and that will be
separating the functions of the
"Presidential Estates Unit".
I agree with the Hon Member for
Akropong (Mr William Ofori Boafo) that
perhaps, we need to expand the scope of
activity as prescribed by the
Memorandum. But as I said, it is a different
ball game and we can come to that.

So let us accept the amendment
proposed by the Chairman and then We
move further to also adopt item (v) as (2)
and we then can proceed from there.
As to the expansion, I believe the Hon
Member for Akropong is right in his
suggestion that we should look to
expanding the spectrum of activities for
the "Presidential Estate Unit".
Mr Hackman Owusu-Agyemang: Mr
Speaker, I will need a bit of explanation
myself as regards the "Presidential Estates
Unit" and the Act which is seeking to
establish it.
Mr Speaker, it talks about:
"to keep an inventory of the assets
and properties of the Government
which are assets and properties not
vested in the Lands Commission
established under article 258 of the
Constitution."
Mr Speaker, if you go to article 258, it
talks only about land. So I do not believe
that the assets of the Government for that
matter of the State can all be vested in a
so-called "Presidential Estates Unit".
Estate by its definition refers to only
landed property. In any case, if the landed
property is not transferred into the name
of somebody else, then the Lands
Commission remains the owner. Those of
us who have lands which are given to us
by the Land Commission, 99 years, 50
years, Mr Speaker, at the end of 50 years
or 99 years, the Lands Commission can
take it back, because they have vested in
them.
So I am having a lot of difficulty trying
to link clause 258 Which talks about the
Lands Commission and what this
particular "Presidential Estates Unit" is
trying to do.
If I do not understand,'then the wider
public may not understand. So maybe, I
need some explanation why it is being
proposed that this Bill either by the
amendment or even by the substantive
one in the Bill is saying that, ". . . is
responsible for purchase and acquisition
in accordance with. . .," and here it says:
"shall in accordance with public
procurement secure and keep an
inventory of all the assets not
vested in the. . ."
So who is taking what? I think the
drafters need to make it clearer and then
the confusion in all our minds would have
been averted.
I have a difficulty in the Presidential
Estates Unit being charged with this
onerous task nationwide, I suppose, of
everything that goes for the Government.
Is that what it is meant?I would want some
explanation from the Hon Chairman of the
Committee, or those who think they
understand, to let me understand, so that
I can make an informed decision on it. This
This is because as it is now, it is not clear
to me. So maybe, the Chairman of the
Committee can help.
12.20 p.m. 
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: With
these apparent more questions than
answers, I direct that we stand down
clause 8. Further deliberations would be
done outside the House and we would
make progress. _
Clauses 9 - Inventory of Assets.
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, there are no listed amendment
for clauses 9 and 10.
Mr Joseph B Aidoo -rose--
Mr Hackman Owusu-Agyemang-
rose-- -

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Are there
related issues affecting ___ If there are
issues that would flow from clause 8 - It
appears clause 9 flows from clause 8 and
we would also have to stand that down.
Clause 10 ordered to stand part of the
Bill.
Clause 11 - Election of Speaker
Mr Kyei-Mensah-B0nsu -~ rose -
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Yes,
Hon Minority Leader, I can see from the
expression on your face-~
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
for clause 10 (I), line (4), that is "move
into an alternate official residence". I am
not too sure of the import of that even
though I understand the principle. I am
not sure I agree, with the language
employed; that of "alternate official
residence".
~ Mr Owusu-Agyemang: Mr Speaker,
again, during the maybe, mea culpa
because I did submit an amendment.
Before we go to the various clauses -
_ Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Owusu-Agyernang, we are on clause 10.
Is this in reference to clause, 10?
Mr Owusu-Agyemang: No. Ithought
we were doing clause 11.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: No. The
Hon Minority Leader raised an issue and
I thought perhaps, the Chairman of the
Committee would be inclined towards it,
then we come to that.
Mr Bandua: Mr Speaker, is it about
the "alternate official residence"? I did
not hear the issue he raised.
Mr Second Deputy Speaker:
"Alternate official residence". Just for-
clarity, then we proceed.
Dr A. A. Osei -~ rose._
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon Dr
Akoto Osei, do you want to assist in that
regard? 
Dr A. A. Osei: Mr Speaker, I was
going to plead with the Chairman of the
Committee that in view of the importance
of the Bill and all the discussions that
have come on regarding the various
clauses, perhaps, We step down the rest
of the amendments for Hon Members to
think through them a bit and come back
when more thought has gone into it. This
is because it looks like we are certainly
going back to the issues that were raised
during the Second Reading and I think
that suggests that Members have a lot of
questions.
So I would want to plead with the
Chairman of the Committee that it may be
useful that we allow Members more time
to look at all the various amendments
together. _
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Thank
you very much.
When We come to a difficult part, we
will advise ourselves accordingly. Let us
see what progress we can make.
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
it appears my attention was not drawn to
the provisions in clause 10 because I do
not also think that it is necessary, apart
from what I raised earlier. The correctness
of those words, that "alternate official
residence". I do not also think that it
should be compelling that once the
outgoing President moves into a new
residence, then we should legislate that
within six months, the person necessarily
must vacate that new accommodation.

I think it is absolutely unnecessary to
legislate that he should leave within the
next ensuing six months. So I think we
should think through properly. As far as
I am concerned that leg is not necessary.
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: So Hon
Minority Leader, you want that we end at
"into an alternate official residence" and
not -
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: "Which
either of them shall vacate within the next
ensuing six months"
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Chairman of the Committee, the idea here
is that we should end at "residence", and
not legislate no "leaving within six
months".
Mr Bandua: Mr Speaker, I think I have
no objection to that. We can leave it at
"residence", and whether they would
Wish to move or not, that one should not
be our business. Once they have been
provided with ofificial residence, so be it.
So I think we would leave it there. Mr
Speaker, I agree with him.
Mr J. B. Aidoo: Mr Speaker, instead of
the "incumbent President and the
incumbent Vice President", I believe that
it should be "the outgoing President and
the outgoing Vice President." This is
because it could happen that the
incumbent President and the incumbent
Vice President could be the same persons
taking office -- [Interruption] --Yes, but
I am saying that instead of incumbent.
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, we decided on some
expressions the other time. Is that not
clear --~ are we on that line? Because I
think we spoke about "incumbent" and
also the "elected".
Hon Chairman of the Committee, was
that not what this Honourable House
decided upon‘? Let us go by what was
the decision. We talked about President~
elect and then we spoke about the
incumbent. 
Very well, then I will put the Question
deleting "which either of them shall vacate
within the next ensuing six months".
Question put and amendment agreed
IO.
Clause 11- Election of Speaker.
12.30 pm.
Mr Bandua: Mr Speaker, I beg to move,
clause 11, section caption, after "Speaker"
insert "of Parliament".
I think the purpose of this is to make it
very distinct. There can be Speakers for
other offices but we are referring
specifically to the Speaker of Parliament.
That is the need for this amendment, Mr
Speaker.
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
I think the amendment is in order.
Question put and amendment agreed
to.
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Further
amendment to clause 11 -Hon Chairman
of the Committee‘?
Mr Bandua: Mr Speaker, it is
consequential.
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
before the Hon Chairman comes in, clause
11(1) which reads as follows:
"Within forty-eight hours after the
declaration of the results of the
presidential elections and the
general election, the Clerk to
Parliament shall summon a meeting
of the elected Members of
Parliament."

Mr Speaker, before January 6, those
Hon Members of Parliament, the
incumbent Parliament will also still be
elected Members of Parliament, which is
why I believe in sync with what we did
earlier, distinguishing between the
President and the President- elect- We
should therefore have this construction:
"... a meeting of the elected
Members of Parliament-elect".
[Interruptions] So, it should be:
"Members of Parliament-elect" -
in place of "elected’Members of
Parliament". _
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Who are
"Members of Parliament", to avoid all
ambiguity? _
Please, let us have it clear.
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
the sitting Members of Parliament are
elected Members of Parliament. The
elected coming ones will be Members of
Parliament-elect because by then they
would not have been sworn-in. And that
is why I am saying that we should change
that construction there in 11(1), line 3, from
"...a meeting of the elected Members of
Parliament" to ". . . a meeting of the
Members ofPar1iament-elect". This is the
difference. 
Mr Bandua: Mr Speaker, I think I would
go with the amendment.
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: And we
are sure it will save us from any ambiguity
whatsoever in the future?
Hon Majority Leader, no difficulty? No
ambiguity? '
Mr Avoka: Mr Speaker, no. I think that
it is an innovation and it is a departure
from What we have been experiencing. I
have been looking at it carefully. It says
two days before the dissolution of
Parliament, the Clerk to Parliament shall
summon a meeting of Members of
Parliament-elect to elect the Speaker, et
cetera. I think this is neater.
Alhaji Sumani Abukari: Mr Speaker,
I have a problem with this. If they are only
Members of Parliament-elect, what
business do they have electing the
Speaker and all those? They are not yet
Members of Parliament then. So how can
they constitute themselves into a group
to elect the Speaker and all those. They
should have been sworn-in and become
Members of Parliament before they can
do the election of the Speaker.
Members of Parliament-elect are not
Members of Parliament.~They are not. So
they cannot perform that function. Yes,
they cannot. They are not Members of
Parliament.
Prof. Gyan-Baffour: Mr Speaker, on
this one, I support my Hon Member from
Tamale North, because on that day,
twenty-four hours or forty-hours, we have
not dissolved Parliament. So, those who
were Members of Parliament before the
election are still Members of Parliament
of this Republic - [ Interruptions. ] And
they are the ones who should come and
elect the Speaker and not the incoming
Members of Parliament.
If they are to do that, then it will mean
that, those of us Who are going to lose are
going to be in this room and those who
have just won are going to be inthis room
and even in that way, practically, where
are they going to sit. If we had over 300
people, where do we Sit to even elect So,
I do not think that is the way to go. No.

Mr Twumasi-Appiah: Mr Speaker, I
think I agree with the Hon_Member who
just spoke that those Members of
Parliament- if one looks at our Standing
Orders, the Speaker‘ is supposed to be
chosen by Members of Parliament,
Members who have been sworn-in as
Members of Parliament, not quasi
Members of Parliament-~ Members who
have not even taken the oath in the firstt
place.
So, I believe that it can be done, as per
the Hon Minority Leader’s explanation
behind the scenes and then when
Parliament is dissolved, and when the new
Members of Parliament-elect come in and
are duly sworn-in and constituted as
Parliament, then they can then elect the
Speaker. But this way of electing a Speaker
when there is Parliament in progress, the
sitting Members, those who have not
even been dissolved, I think we should
take a look at it again.
Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, if you
look at clause l1 and you read the
Memorandum that accompanied the Bill,
specifically page xiii, that is item (i),
where it talks about the election of
Speaker, it says that the reason they were
proposing clause 11, is because of
sometimes the unnecessary delay in the"
election of Speaker. 
Mr Speaker, I think this can better be
cured in a better manner rather than the
way it is being couched. Yes, it will be
very difficult to manage the process of
having Hon Members of Parliament-elect
being around at the same time with
incumbent Members of Parliament.
So, Mr Speaker, we need to keep the
current arrangement but then instead of
clause 12, even though we are yet to get
there, talks about swearing~in the
President at 10.00 a.m., I think that we
should put it "swearing-in the President
at 2.00 p.m." So, based on -the
memorandum that accompanied this Bill,
if it is because of the issue of delay and
getting dignitaries waiting unnecessarily
for Parliament to finish and then move on
to swear-in the President, then we can
easily do it. This is because if you look at
almost all the transition periods, we have
not succeeded in swearing in the
President at 10 o’clock, which is practical.
That in all the instances, it was so
difiicult to get Parliament Sit, swear-in the
Speaker of Parliament and then move on
to swear- in the President. We have never
had the opportunity of doing it at ten
o’clock. It tells us that the ten o’clock is
not practical.
So, what_we need to do, if we think
that it is unnecessary delay that we need
to cure from Parliament, we should not try
to correct it by bringing in Members of
Parliament-elect when the incumbent
Members of Parliament are still Sitting.
So we should rather maintain it the way
it is, and say that the swearing-in of the
President should be in the afternoon,
which is at 2.00 p.m. and in this case,
maybe, we can further qualify it by saying
that the Clerk to Parliament could call in
the Sitting of Parliament much earlier like
we have tried to do in some years back
where we are asked to assemble at 8.00
a.m. hoping that at worse by I2 noon we
would have finished to be able to move
on to go wherever before Parliament to
swear-in the in-coming President at 2-00
pm
But to say we should maintain it the
Way it is now in the Bill, and only bring
Members of Parliament-elect, even saying
48 hours, even though I have seen the
Chairman proposing an amendment.
Mr Speaker, to say "48 hours after the
declaration of the results" is very
unconstitutional, because the then sitting
Members of Parliament would not have
finished with their tenure. I can see that
the Chairman is making an effort to correct
that. But even when that is corrected to
say 2.00 p.m. after the dissolution of
Parliament, if we truly want to cure the
issue about unnecessary delay, I do not
think the way to go is about using
‘Members of Parliament-.elect.’ '
12.40 p.m.
Mr Hackman Owusu-Agyemang: Mr
Speaker,I would want to support him by
saying that we have met at midnight
before. "On the midnight of the 6"‘
Parliament is dissolved", and it is only
then that you can have the processes that
lead to the next set. I am suggesting that
if we have all thought about this, Mr
Speaker, that midnight of the 6"‘ you
summon the new Members of Parliament
(MPs) to come and between midnight and
10.00 o’clock or 12 o’clock or 2.00 o’clock
as suggested, you would have done it.
Then everything would be in tandem with
the constitutional provisions that we
have.
We have come here at midnight before,
and if that is what serves the purpose, we
should do that. I do not really believe
that we should get people two days before
or 48 hours before we come. That would
be unconstitutional. Somebody would go
to the Supreme Court and tell you he is
still de jury the Member of Parliament (MP)
and Mr Speaker, de jury an MP-elect
cannot elect the Speaker because the
Speaker must first be sworn-in by the
Chief Justice. So if the Speaker is not
sworn-in by the Chief Justice, he cannot
swear-in the MPs_
So the only way you can cure this
difficulty is to let us come at midnight and
hopefully, before then a lot of work would
have been done in the background and
we would have gone. Because I do not
see, unless the Chairman or those who
know, would explain it to me. For my 16
years, I do not see how we can do the
issue as being proposed in the Bill. So I
think we have to address our minds to
that.
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: MrSpeaker,
we all should understand that before
Parliament Sits, properly so-called, the
new Parliament which contains Members
of Parliament~elect do elect the Speaker.
Mr Speaker, that is captured in article 95
of the Constitution. Now, article 100 of
the Constitution provides that after
Parliament has elected the Speaker who
then subsequently is sworn into office by
the Chief Justice, Members of Parliament
then take their oaths before the Speaker.
So the Speaker must be elected first by
Members ofParlian1ent-elect before being
sworn-in by the Chief Justice and the
Speaker also administers the oath to
Members of Parliament. Unfortunately,
Mr Speaker, the difficulty is that article 95
of the Constitution does not talk about
Members of Parliament~elect electing the
Speaker; that is the difficulty. But to all
intents and purposes, ~ Members of
Parliament-elect -.Consider 7th January,
1993, who were there?
They were Members of Parliament who
had been elected; they elected the Speaker
from among themselves or persons who
qualify to be Members of Parliament and
then that person was sworn-in by the
Chief Justice. Then article 100 thereafter
applies. The Members of Parliament-elect
are then sworn in by the Speaker.
Mr Speaker, that is how it is. The Hon
Member for Asawase, Alhaji Muntaka’s
difficulty is that perhaps, article 95 does
not use the words "Members of
Parliament-elect". But to all intents and
purposes, that is the intendment of that
provision. It is the Members of Parliament-
elect who elect the Speaker. The Speaker,
he or she, is sworn- in, then per article 100
of the Constitution he or she then swears
in Members of Parliament and then they
then assume their position or their roles
as Members of Parliament. Mr Speaker,
that is the distinction and I believe with
that we can move on. ~
Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, having
heard the Minority Leader, I think what
we are trying to propose, which we must
state clearly, is that the Members of
Parliament~elect are going to do the so-
called 48 hours , which would mean that,
for example, if the election was held, say,
on 7th December and was declared on 10th
December, by 12th December these
Members of Parliament~elect would meet
- [Interruption]
No, he is talking about before 7th. So
maybe, 5th , they would meet and then elect
a Speaker that would not be sworn~in and
only wait for the dissolution of Parliament
and they would only come for swearing-
in and not election on the 7th day.
If this is what we intend to achieve,
then let us say so, so that it becomes clear.
But I am looking at the arrangement
around that time. Mr Speaker, we need to
be very practical in pursuing this agenda.
[lnterruptions.] We should remember
that immediately after elections -
[lnterruptions.] . .
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Order!
Order!
Alhaji Muntaka: -there would be too
many activities happening around that
time. Whether practically it would be
possible for the Members of Parliament-
elect to still be engaged While Members
of Parliament-incumbent are still having
proceedings. We should look at that
practicality. So we are saying that the
Sitting Members of Parliament, after they
have finished with their deliberations for
the day, after maybe, 2.00 p.m. or 4.00
p.m., then those elect could have space
to consider this activity; we need to look
at it. I do not think practically, that may
be very feasible. So it is possible for us to
rather maintain the same arrangement and
look at how we can do the timing -
[Interruptions]
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Order!
Order!
Alhaji Muntaka: Like my Hon Senior
Colleague, Hackman Owusu-Agyemang
rightly mentioned, if we think that
because of timing, we could start
proceedings immediately after the
midnight, let us do so. But let us not try
to introduce new methods or system that
may jam the whole arrangement Within
that period.
Mr Ambrose P. Dery: Mr Speaker, I
am not going to contribute to the timing
matters. I think that if you look at article
100, clause (2) of the Constitution and with
your permission, I beg to read:
"A Member of Parliament may,
before taking the oaths referred to
in clause (1) of this article, take part
in the election of the Speaker."
It settles it completely, that before you
take the oath, you take part in the election;
the Constitution gives that authority to
do that. So that is why I just wanted to
seal What the Minority Leader is saying
and therefore, it must not be opened to
Hon Sumani Abukari’s -
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Other
issues have been raised; other difficulties
have been raised by Hon Muntaka and
others. It is not only the matter of the
swearing~in.

Mr J. B. Aidoo: Mr Speaker, the
Minority Leader raised a very fundamental
issue -
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Order!
Order! 
Hon Members, order. Let us listen;
these are very important matters. 
12.50 p.m.
Mr J. B. Aidoo: Mr Speaker, it is in
respect of the election of the Speaker and
as he read, that is, article 95 -
"There shall be a Speaker of
Parliament who shall be elected by
the Members of Parliament . ."
Mr Speaker, 48 hours, before the
swearing-in of the President, as they are
being indicated and before the dissolution
of Parliament -
Mr Speaker, if the Members-elect are
to come and swear-in a Speaker, the old
Members would be there, that is, the
outgoing Members of Parliament would
be there. And according to the
Constitution, the Speaker is to be elected
by Members of Parliament; the
Constitution did not specify whether it
should be the new Members, to borrow
your Words - [Interruption] - please,
we have not got there. It is about
"Election of the Speaker" -
[Interruption] --No, article 100 is talking
about - Mr Speaker, what we are looking
at now is the election of -
Mr Second Deputy Speaker:
Article -- 100 (2) -
"A Member of Parliament may,
before taking the oaths referred to
~ in clause (1) of this article, take part
in the election of the Speaker."
Hon Member, you may continue.
Mr J. B. Aidoo: Yes, Mr Speaker,
agreed; but the point is that, who can take
part? What about the old Members?
Clause 95 is not very clear and my point is
that we should have the dissolution of
the existing Parliament firstt before we can
proceed to have another Parliament.
Mr Second Deputy Speaker:Very well.
Hon Members, the proposition is that,
no matter what happens, the dissolution
must take place before other Members
come to elect the Speaker. Assuming, Hon
Members- let us address our minds to
this; just for the sake of argument, there
is what you may call an outgoing Member
but who is also an elected. Member of
Parliament who insists that nothing debars
him from taking part in the vote by the
Constitution, even as per article 100 (1)
and (2).
Are we sure there cannot be any
difficulty? Because that is making the law
is about-~- to avoid -
Papa Owusu-Ankomah: Mr Speaker,
we have been operating our Constitution
over the past twenty years, yes, since 1992
-20 years. We have had five Parliaments;
we have had transitions; we have
encountered some problems. Having
regard to those experiences that we have
had, we seek to improve the transition. I
believe we should not create problems
where there are no problems.
Almost every time when there has been
a transition, there has been a lacuna; there
has always been. This is because when
the old Parliament is dissolved, there is
about six hours or twelve hours; it has
always been there. Now, we will want to
tidy up the system and We are saying that
for purposes of a Parliament, there can
only be one Parliament, we cannot have
two "Parliaments. The Parliament of 7th
January, 2016 can never be the Parliament
preceding that

So for certain purposes, we are
constituting the Parliament for the next
Government. I do not think there should
be a problem. If we say Members of
Parliament who have been elected to take
office on 7"‘ January, 2013 are to meet to
take certain decisions, how can someone
who is not a Member of that Parliament
say he is a Member of Parliament? Yes,
technically he/she is a Member of
Parliament; but not a Member of
Parliament of that Parliament.
I do not think it creates any legal
problem at all, particularly when we all
understand that we want to tidy up the
transition. So in my view, you know, there
can only be one Parliament and it must be
constituted by a certain number of
Members. We can have an incumbent and
an elected -
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Papa-
Papa Owusu-Ankomah: So I do not
have a proposal. All I am saying is that
the arguments that we are advancing,
given the impression that there is going
to be a difficulty, we have to hope for the
dissolution of that Parliament, is not
something that practically arises.
Mr Second Deputy Speaker:Very well.
Thank you very much, Hon Papa Owusu-
Ankomah.
Alhaji Abukari Sumani: Mr Speaker,
we would be grateful if the former
Attorney-General and Minister for Justice
can help us with a definition of who is a
Member of Parliament? When does he
become Member of Parliament, and when
does his tenure end? We would be very
grateful.
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Yes, Hon
Chairman of the Committee - in fact, you
have made a statement --
Alhaji Abukari: It is not a statement;
it is very important.
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: It is a
question loaded with a statement.
Alhaji Sumani: We ought to clear our
minds when the Constitution talks about
a Member of Parliament; that will tell us
what the Constitution means by a
"Member of Parliament".
Papa Owusu-Ankomah: Mr Speaker,
if you are asking me about the Members
of the Fifth Parliament of the Republic of
Ghana, I will say that they are the Members
who Will be elected after the general
election of 2012. That is all I can say. It
becomes effective on the day when they
assume office -- yes -- when they
assume office. You can decide to swear;
in someone to take effect in three weeks;
is there anything wrong with that?
Mr Bandua -rose-
Mr Felix Twumasi-Appiah: Mr
Speaker, I think the difficulty here has to
do with 48 hours before the 7th January
swearing-in of the Speaker.
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Chairman
of the Committee, you would come in later.
Hon Chairman, you are listening to them
and your views will be very instructive at
the latter point. 
Mr Twumasi-Appiah: As Hon Papa
said, if the difficulty is that we want to
improve on the earlier arrangement, We can
have Parliament mid-night as usual, and
have the new Members of Parliament
sworn-in, let us say at 1.00 a.m.; have all
these arrangements in place before the 8
o’clock that my Hon good Friend was
suggesting.

But we should not forget that
somewhere within the Fourth Republican
Parliament, I have cases where, I think the
then Minority Leader, Hon J. H. Mensah
raised the issue about the place to swear
in the Speaker. He was insisting that it
must be done on the floor of the House,
not under a certain tree, or under a certain
canopy or on some other park somewhere.
He wanted it to be done on the floor of
the House.
Taking that in mind, I think that we can
have Parliament dissolved mid-night 6th
January, have the Members of Parliament-
elect sworn-in one minute after mid-night,
if they so wish and then we carry on from
there and elect a Speaker, by which way,
we would have more time to let the
President in and also have the President
sworn-in.
So I think we want to improve upon
the earlier arrangement and this is what I
propose.
Thank you very much.
Dr A. A. Osei - rose -
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: That
would be very tidy.
Hon Dr Akoto Osei, you would wait a
while.
Hon Member- I want us to spread
the contribution as much as possible.
Mr Simon Osei-Mensah:Mr Speaker,
considering the importance of this
particular Bill and the amendments we
want to make, I wish we could suspend
debate or discussion on the Bill, so that
people can go back, read and reflect and
then we organize a Committee of the
Whole to discuss other welfare matters.
I think we need to suspend the debate
now and then consider other serious
Business of the House.
1.O0 p.m.
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: This is a
House of debate and debate will continue.
Mr Bandua: Mr Speaker, l think that I
share the sentiments of the Hon Member
for Sekondi (Papa Owusu-Ankomah). The
only problem that is arising is whether or
not the Members of Parliament- elect have
the capacity to take the election of the
Speaker before they are sworn in, and that
defect has been cured by article 102. So I
do not see any problem. There is no
problem.
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, in fact, this is the only way
some of these important matters may be
addressed, is the way Hon Members are
doing now. This is the only way some of
these important matters can be discussed.
It is not a matter of some winnowing.
Those matters are different and in fact,
this is a very important debate that will
reflect in the Hansard for posterity.
Hon Yieleh Chireh, you will continue.
Mr Chireh: Mr Speaker, I have looked
at article 95 and if you read article 95 (1)
very closely, it says:
"There shall be a Speaker of
Parliament who shall be elected by
the Members of Parliament from
among persons who are Members
of Parliament or who are qualified
to be elected as Members of
Parliament."
With this, the issue in this Bill that it
is trying to resolve is that, 48 hours or
two days before the President is sworn
in, you convene Members of Parliament-
elect to come and elect a Speaker. It is
possible and it is practicable. Now,
Members of Parliament-elect will elect
the Speaker 48 hours to -- now the old
Parliament is not dissolved --
[Interruption] Wait, I am coming to
the point. The old Parliament --
[Interruption]

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Order!
Order!
Mr Twumasi-Appiah: On a point of
order.
Mr Speaker, if I may remind my good
Friend, 48 hours before the last Parliament
was dissolved, it was Sitting. I remember
very well; we were on the floor of this
House -still considering Bills and other
activities. We were still Sitting. Where
are they going to elect that Speaker? I
have already made reference to the fact
that in the last Parliament, Hon J. H.
Mensah raised an issue about even Where
to swear-in the President -
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Yieleh Chireh, you will assume your seat
for the time being.
Mr Twumasi-Appiah: Even where to
swear-in the President and the Speaker,
he disagreed. I think even"that matter
almost went to court. He disagreed with
where to swear-in the President, whether
it should be at the lndependence Square,
whether it should be under a tree
somewhere, whether it should be in a
classroom somewhere. His argument was
that the President and the Speaker must
be sworn-in before Parliament on the floor
of the House. On 4th January as of. Last
three years, Parliament was still in
Session. '
Even on 6th January, the last Parliament
was still in Session.We had to come here,
close, go back home around 5.00 p.m. and
come back for dissolution. I think, like
Hon Papa Owusu-Ankomah said, if we
want to improve on the existing
arrangement, what we need to do is that,
as soon as Parliament is dissolved
midnight, the incoming Parliament can
then takeover, do all their behind the scene
arrangements, have the Speaker sworn-
in, they themselves sworn-in and then
wait for the Presidential swearing-in. I
think that should be the better arrangement
that we can have as a House.
Mr Avoka -- rose -
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon_
Majority Leader, do you have a point of
order?
Mr Avoka: Mr Speaker, after Hon Yieleh
Chireh, with your kind indulgence---
Mr Chireh: Mr Speaker, you can see
that I was not yielding - 
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Majority Leader, if you want to take your
precedence, you take it now.
Mr Chireh: Mr Speaker, then it means
that -
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Majority Leader, I have called you. You
were on your feet and I recognised you}
Mr Avoka: Mr Speaker, the combined
effect of article 95 (4) and 100 (2) is this,
simple:
"Members of Parliament-elect can
elect the Speaker before they are
sworn-in as Members of
Parliament."
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: That is
true and all Hon Members have no doubt
about that. It is not the issue.
Mr Avoka: Yes. That being so, two
days before the dissolution of Parliament,‘
Members of Parliament-elect who have
not yet been sworn-in can meet anywhere
in the country and elect the Speaker of
Parliament. The Constitution provides
that.
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Any
Where in the country?
Mr Avoka: Yes, I mean the laws are
there. We can meet at the International
Conference Centre; we can meet here
during the day -

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Majority Leader --- _
Mr Avoka: Mr Speaker, the point is
not the venue. I am talking about the
principle." The point is not the venue. We
should not capitalise on the venue and
digress. I am saying that two days before
Parliament is dissolved, while we have
Members of Parliament-elect, the
Constitution empowers them to elect a
Speaker before they are sworn-in. They
are sworn-in under article 100. But the
Constitution says that before they are
even sworn-in -
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: I will
always think that Hon Members must meet
in this House, not meet anywhere and
elect a Speaker. The Hon Majority Leader
was leading us into temptation.
Mr Emmanuel A. Owusu-Ansah: On a
point of order.
Mr Speaker, the Hon Majority Leader
is speaking as though in this country the
Constitution creates two Speakers at the
same time. The Constitution creates one
Speaker at one time. When one Parliament
exits and another one comes into being,
the new one elects its own Speaker and
he/she is sworn-in. -
So if we go by his postulation that we
should have a Speaker sworn-in two or
three days before the end of the exiting
Speaker, then What will be the situation of
the Speaker that has been sworn-in?
What will be his function? What will be
his status in Parliament? We can have
one Speaker at one time.
So as Hon Papa Owusu-Ankomah said,
there is always a lacuna at 12 midnight on
6th January. One Parliament leaves office,
the other Parliament comes into being the
next day when a Speaker has been sworn
into office and the Speaker has also in turn
sworn-in Members of Parliament into
office.
Mr Speaker, my position is that, we
cannot go by the Majority Leader’s
position. It will create unnecessary
trouble for us.
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: I think
there should be less of points of order as
possible, so that there will be
contributions and of course, Leaders in
particular will have all the contributions
they want to make.
Hon Minority "Leader, if you want to
speak, you may have to negotiate with
the Hon Majority Leader.
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
it is just a point of information and I believe
Hon Members would advert their minds
to article 106 (11) -- Parliament has the
powers to postpone the operation of a law
that we make. We do have the power so
to do. Parliament by article 106 (11), we
have the inherent power in making a law
to determine the effective operation of
that law. So we do not need to meet at
midnight as people have been labouring
to establish. So Mr Speaker, they do not
have to travel that path at all. It is as
crystal clear as daylight. V
Mr Avoka: Mr Speaker, if I may
continue.
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Yes, Hon
Majority Leader, you can continue.
MrAv0ka: Mr Speaker, if you look
at article 95 (4), it addresses the issue that
Hon Owusu-Ansah was trying to draw
attention to. Article 95 (4) says:
"A person elected to the office of
Speaker shall, before entering up on
the duties of his office, take and
subscribe before Parliament the
oath of allegiance and the Speaker's
oath set out in the ..." -

So if we meet as Hon Members of
Parliament without even taking an oath
as Such, we can elect a Speaker. We under
article 95(4) - So it is not automatic that
when we elect a Speaker, he-or she will
start duty the same day or the following
day. No.
1.10p.m.
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Majority Leader, that is not part of the
argument anyway.
Mr Twumasi-Appiah: Mr Speaker, I
think the fundamental point we are making
here is that, what will be wrong as per the
Minority Leader’s argument, what will be
wrong if we wait for the incumbent
Parliament to be dissolved before we go
in and elect it; what will be wrong? All we
are saying is that we think the Speaker
should be selected or elected on the floor
of this House and I did give an example
that the last Parliament as of 5th January,
before the midnight dissolution,
Parliament was still in Session.
So where are they going to Sit to elect
this new Parliament? Where the incumbent
Parliament is Sitting? Hon J. H. Mensah
raised this issue about the venue. I think
that was in 19 - [Interruption]
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Order!
Order! 
Mr Kwabena O. Darko-Mensah:
Mr Speaker, we just want to solve a
problem and we should be clear about
time lines- [Interruption]
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Order!
Order!
Mr Darko-Mensah: Mr Speaker, this
is not the first time there is a transition in
Parliament. There have been transitions
and there have been clear lines, the last
time the old Parliament left and the new
one came in -- So I do not see why we
should worry ourselves. The whole of 6th
January, Parliament has time to dissolve
itself. So on the 6th , we should dissolve
Parliament and then the new Parliament
comes in on the 7th and we do all the
processes to bring in the new Speaker.
Mr Speaker, most of the problems we
have had with transitions have never been
parliamentary transitions. It has been with
the presidential transitions and that is
where the issue should be going. So I
believe that in the same way we adjourn,
and Madam Speaker will handle issues
While we have adjourned, that one day if
Madam Speaker or Mr Speaker is handling
issues for Parliament, I do not think it is
going to be any major difficulty for this
House. We should just make sure on the
6th we dissolve.
We do not need to dissolve at 12.00
midnight. I think that we do not need to
do that. So on the same way, we move on.
Mr Speaker, I believe We can move on to
welfare matters. It is very important to us.
Mr Boafo: Mr Speaker, I think if We
read this article 95 in isolation, then we
come to a very strict interpretation of the
provisions. But Mr Speaker, a cardinal
rule of interpretation is that you read an
Act of the Constitution as awhole. So we
have to read article 95 together with article
100 (2) and the only thing is that article
100 (2) gives a window for us which can
be taken care of by enactment of this
particular Bill to cater for the lacuna which
the Hon Member for Sekondi alluded to.
Mr Speaker, I do not think we can have
two Speakers, just as we cannot have two
Presidents. This is because we have a
President-elect and an incumbent
President. So equally, we can have a
Speaker-elect - [Interruption]
Mr Avoka - rose-
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Majority Leader, do you have a point of
order?
Mr Avoka: Mr Speaker, this is a point
of information.
Mr Speaker, the argument has become
intense and no wonder it a is very
interesting but challenging clause that we
want to make. In the light of the earlier
deferment of clauses 8 and 9, I will want
to humbly suggest that we defer this one
too, so that a few of us, those of us who
are interested, can look at it after this and
then come back and take that one. We
can go to clause 13 - _
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Majority Leader, I thought there was the
need to move into other matters. So I am
agreeable with you but actually, it has
been very useful. We are getting a good
idea about the kind of transition that we
will want to see- I believe some of the
dynamics can be worked out in greater
detail but you may Want to have the House
adjourned and then we go into -
Mr Avoka: Mr Speaker, with your kind
indulgence, I thought that we could take
items 12 and l3 that are not controversial.
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Majority Leader, Ithought in view of what
is happening generally, you will take the
cue rather from me.
Mr Cletus A. Avoka: Very well.
Mr Speaker, following the interesting
developments and challenges in the
clauses that we have left, I think it will be
prudent for us to adjourn the House so
that those who have various ideas on the
subject will meet subsequently and then
iron out these clauses for a neater debate
tomorrow or thereabout.
In the circumstances, I beg to move,
that we adjourn proceedings for today
until tomorrow at 10.00 in the forenoon.
‘Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Majority Leader, are there other
announcernents you will want to make?
Mr Avoka: Mr Speaker, I have
information that last Friday, unfortunately,
I was not here, there was a desire on the
part of Hon Colleagues for us to have a
joint caucus meeting. I have no objection.
We can have the meeting as soon as We
close for some few minutes and then
discuss some matters and then see how
we can resolve them.
So, for the information of everyone of
us, as soon as we adjourn, we can remain
in the Chamber and have some few
minutes discussion for the benefit of all
I beg to move, subject to that
announcement, Mr Speaker.
Mr Osei Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr
Speaker, I made a suggestion to my
Colleague the Majority Leader and the
Attorney-General and Minister for
Justice, in respect of the Presidential
Transition Bill that is before us. I would
plead that the Majority Leader follows
through the suggestion diligently. It will
save us this forwards and backwards
movement. 
Mr Speaker, the suggestion that I
proffered, was to the effect that we find
ourselves on a very constricted path and
that is what is yielding before us the
Presidential Transition Bill. Mr Speaker, I
had suggested to the Attorney-General
and the Majority Leader, that we should
endeavour to capture the language
relating to the presidential election as
expressed in the Constitution, which is
that the presidential election could be held
anytime between September 6th and
December 7th. In respect of the general
elections relating to Members of
Parliament, we only have December 7th.
Mr Speaker, if we amended that portion
of the Constitution to capture the
expression with respect to the holding of
the presidential election, we will be home
and dry rather than imposing on ourselves
48 hours before this, 24 hours before that
- Mr Speaker, let us do that. Once you do
that, even when we have the Transition
Bill, it is not an entrenched provision. It
is not. It is not an entrenched provision;
we can go back and quickly do that and
once we do that, we will be home and dry.
Mr Speaker, that is where the problem
is; it is the kernel of this matter; let us go
and address it. Let us go and address it
and itiwould resolve this whole problem
for us.
Having said that, Mr Speaker, I beg to
second the Motion moved by the Majority
Leader -
Mr Avoka - rose -
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Minority Leader, you may continue.
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: I would want
to second the Motion moved by the
Maj ority Leader for adjournment to enable
us move into a caucus of the Whole
Meeting. Mr Speaker, I believe the events
that will unfold, the discussions that we
hold, would determine how many minutes
and hours that meeting should last.
I would want to resist the temptation
by the Majority Leader that we will only
meet for a few minutes. It may not be for
a few minutes, Let us move into a meeting
and the circumstances will determine how
long the meeting will last.
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: The
Motion for adjournment has been moved
and seconded. ,
Question put and Motion agreed to.
ADJOURNMENT
The House was accordingly
adjourned at 1.20-p.m.till Wednesday, 15th
February, 2012 at 10.00 a.m.



a

