FOURTH SERIES VOL 76 No.3

THURSDAY 26TH JANUARY, 2012





PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES



OFFICIAL REPORT



THURSDAY, 26TH JANUARY, 2012



CONTENTS 



ANNOUNCEMENTS-

Communication from the President-- [Cols. 99, 101] 



VOTES AND PROCEEDINGS AND THE OFFICLAL REPORT -- [Col. 102]



MOTIONS - 

Request for Waiver of Tax and Duty Liabilities on Equipment and
Materials for the Mampong Water Supply Rehabilitation and Expansion
Project- [col. 114] 



RESOLUTIONS -

Request for Waiver of Taxes on Equipment and Materials for Mampong
Water Supply Rehabilitation and Expansion Project- [Col. 148]



SECOND READING OF BILLS -

i) National Fiscal Stabilisation Levy (Repeal) Bill, 2011 -[Col. 151]
ii) Customs and Excise (Duties and Other Taxes)(Amendment) Bill,
2011 -[Col. 162]
iii) Internal Revenue (Amendment)(No.2) Bill, 2011 -- [Col. 165]



ADJOURNMENT--[Col. 182]





Correction of errors of substance may be made only on the floor of the House with the permission of the Speaker. However, correction of typographical or grammatical errors which Members suggest for
the Bound Volumes which will be compiled at the end of the Meeting may be clearly marked in the Daily
Report, and the copy containing the corrections must be received at the Editor's Office, Parliament
House, not later than four clear days after the publication of the Daily Report. 



BOUND VOLUMES of Debates (with comprehensive Index) are issued periodically during the Session
There is no fixed subscription rate, but prices will be quoted and standing orders entered on
application. 



Printed by Department of Official Report
Parliament House, Accra

[99]

THE

PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC

OF GHANA



FIRST MEETING, 2012



Thursday, 26th January, 2012
The House met at 10.50 a.m.



[MADAM SPEAKER IN THE CHAIR]



PRAYERS



ANNOUNCEMENTS

Communication from the President

Madam Speaker: Hon Members, I
have received communication from His
Excellency the President and I will read it
to you.



"25th January, 2012



Right Honourable Speaker,



I wish to inform you that I have
nominated for consideration by Parliament
the following:



Ministers-designate:



Hon Moses Asaga, Member of
Parliament for Nabdam -
Minister-designate for Employment
and Social Welfare;



Mr William Kwasi Aboah - 
Minister designate for the Interior



Ambassador Lee Ocran, Ghana’s
High Commissioner to South Africa-
Minister-designate for Education;



Hon Fritz Baffour, Member of
Parliament for Ablekuma South -
Minister designate for Information;



Hon Dominic Azimbe Azumah,
Member of Parliament for Garuf
Tempane - 
Minister of State-designate at the
Presidency; and

[100]

Ambassador Amin Amidu Sulemani,
currently Ghana‘s Ambassador to
Egypt - 
Minister-designate for Upper West
Region. 



Deputy Ministers-designate: 
Hon Stephen Ackah, Member of
Parliament for Suaman - Deputy
Minister -designate for the Ministry
of Local Government and Rural
Development;



Mr Isaac Vanderpuiye -
Deputy Minister designate for
Greater Accra Region;



Mr Henry Ametepey -
Deputy Minister-designate for the
Volta Region. 



Kindly accept, Right Honourable, the
assurances of my highest consideration.



(Sgd.) PROF. JOHN EVANS ATTA MILLS

PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC

OF GHANA



RT. HON SPEAKER

OFFICE OF PARLIAMENT

STATE HOUSE

OSU - ACCRA." 



Hon Members, I refer this matter to the
Appointments Committee for action,
vetting and necessary report.



Dr Anthony A. Osei: Madam Speaker,
I recall the day - is it two days ago, we
heard some rumours -



Madam Speaker: You see, the rumours
I do not accept -



Dr A. A. Osei: They have been
confirmed. 



Madam Speaker: But not all rumours
have been confirmed.

[101]

Dr A. A. Osei: No, I was not specific. I 
said a reshuffle was impending so we are 
waiting for the Minister-designate to -
we shall not name the position.



11.00 am.



Madam Speaker: Hon Members, I
have not even finished reading the
communications, I have another one from
the President dated 25th January, 2012.



"25th January, 2012



THE RT HON SPEAKER

OFFICE or PARLIAMENT

PARLIAMENT HOUSE

ACCRA



Right Hon Speaker,



Absence from Ghana



In accordance with article 59 of the
Constitution of the Republic of Ghana, I
Write to inform you that I will be absent
from Ghana from Friday, 27th of January to
Tuesday, 31st of January, 2012, during
which period I shall attend the 18th
Ordinary Session of the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the
African Union in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.



During my absence from Ghana, the
Vice President, H.E. John Dramani
Mahama, shall, in accordance with article
60 (8) of the Constitution, act in my stead.



Kindly accept, Right Honourable, the
assurances of my highest consideration.



(Sgd.) PROF. JOHN EVANS ATTA MILLS

PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF

GHANA



Cc: H.E. VICE PRESIDENT

[102]

Votes and,Proceedings and
the Official Report



[No correction was made to the Votes
and Proceedings of Wednesday,
25th January, 2012.]



Madam Speaker: We have also the
Official Report of Tuesday, 24th January,

2012.



Any corrections?



Dr A.A. Osei: Madam Speaker, I just
need some guidance.



I notice that on the 24th January, 2012,
the list of Cabinet Ministers was brought
to us. This is the Official Report. Madam
Speaker, is that right? And on the first
page, we have list of Cabinet Ministers. I
was wondering if the Clerks- at- Table
brought it to reflect the last change that
we had and why they were in a rush to
bring it this early.



Madam Speaker; You are referring to
the -



Dr A. A. Osei: To the list of Cabinet
Ministers and Non-Cabinet - 



Madam Speaker: For the Official
Report of Tuesday, 24th January, 2012?



Dr A.A. Osei: Yes, Madam Speaker.



Madam Speaker: That is the first
Page? 



Dr A. A. Osei: Page (i) - was there a
reason for bringing the list? I do not
understand the rationale for giving us this
name. I just want to understand.



Madam Speaker: Yes, I will find out-
[Pause]



Dr A. A. Osei: Madam Speaker, the
thing is that I do not know if officially the
communication about the Acting
Attorney-General and Minister for Justice
has been brought to the House. It was in
the public domain but I think until it is

[103]

[MRA.A. OSEI]



brought to the House, it cannot be
considered official. So why - maybe, I
am not privy to some information that you
have but I thought when we first came,
there was no official communication to the
House as to who was acting where and so
on and so forth - [Pause]



On Tuesday, when we came, we were
not informed that official communication
had been brought to the House regarding
Hon Dr Benjamin Kunbuor. I thought the
House only received official commu-
nication about such matters, then it
becomes official. In spite of the fact that
this was in the public domain, we were
not informed that your goodself had
received official communication that Hon
Dr Kunbuor was Acting Attorney-General
and Minister for Justice.



Madam Speaker: No, not the official
communication to me. This is because I
received that only, I think, today; they
have taken it away. But was it not printed
in the newspapers that this had occurred?



Dr A. A. Osei: Madam Speaker, but I
thought this House did not consider -



Madam Speaker: Was it a rumour?
Would you call that rumour?



Dr A.A. Osei: Madam Speaker, as far
as this House is concerned -



Madam Speaker: I thought a rumour
was something which has not come in the
newspapers.



Dr A. A. Osei: Precisely. No, I do not
know -- even if it was in the newspapers,
I would Want to be educated. I thought
the House received official commu-
nication, then it becomes official. But if
the House is able to pick what is in the

[104]

newspapers and bring it to us, it might be
dangerous. This is because the
newspapers could be wrong, and they are
wrong several times. So l do not know
the source of this fact.



Madam Speaker: Well, l would agree
with you in respect of, maybe, the Deputy
Ministers who have not yet been vetted.
Is it not? But with - for instance, l, like
you are saying, most of them have already
been vetted, have they not; so that even
if it is printed here -



Dr A. A. Osei: Madam Speaker, this
House is saying officially on 24th January,
2012, Hon Dr Kunbuor was Acting
Attorney-General and Minister for Justice
and all I am asking is, has the House
received communication to that effect or
is it coming from the publication in the
newspapers? This is because some
newspapers including the Daily Graphic
sometimes are wrong. So I would want to
be guided that -



Madam Speaker: The only
communication I received is what I read
to you today about official notification
for Parliament Is it not?



Yes, Leader of the House, were you
going to answer that?



Mr Cletus A. Avoka: Madam Speaker,
from experience or the practice is that,
since 1993 --- I stand corrected. But
What I know is that those nominated who
have to attend before the Appointments
Committee for vetting, there is normally
official communication to the Speaker or
to the House, for that matter.



But where Ministers have been shifted
from one Ministry to the other, there have
often not been official communication to
the Speaker to that effect. Unless we are
saying that out of good governance or
good practice, it may be useful for the
Presidency to normally also communicate

[105]

[MRAVOKA]



to the House the official transfers, that is
so. 



But from practice, what has been
happening so far, that has been the
situation. That unless the Minister is due
for vetting, Ministers just swapping
positions, et cetera, and who have already
been vetted and approved by this House,
do not normally come back to inform the
House about the changes.



But it is not out of place if because of
the fact that these days even official
newspapers normally publish wrong
names or titles here and there, it may be
useful for us to advocate for that. But
that has not been the practice, Madam
Speaker.



Dr A. A. Osei: Madam Speaker,
Ministers act for their Colleagues all the
time. For example, when Hon Joseph
Yieleh Chireh went on sick leave, Hon
Haruna Iddrisu was acting for him but we
never published it in here as Acting
Minister. So they act for their Colleagues
all the time.



My concern is that, this is saying that
officially, this House is accepting that
Hon Dr Kunbuor has been appointed as
Acting Attorney-General and Minister for
Justice and unless there is official
communication to the House, it can be
dangerous if we are picking the
information from the newspapers. 



This is because Ministers act for their
Colleagues all the time and where do we
take it as official and not? The Daily
Graphic, Ghanaian Times, they make
mistakes all the time. So we should be
careful the source of the information that
we put in the Hansard. The Hansard
should accurately reflect what this House
knows officially, not what is in the public
domain, otherwise, we would be heading
towards trouble. It is not a good practice;
I think we need to be guided by it.

[106]

11.10.a.m.



Madam Speaker: Well, that is true,
except the case on 24th January, 2012, was
that not the situation?



Dr A. A. Osei: I am not aware that is
why I was asking. If you had official
communication, then -



Madam Speaker: No, l did not have.
But like the Hon Leader said, it is only
those to be vetted that are brought here
and I refer them to the Appointments
Committee.



Dr A. A. Osei: But on that page, Hon
Benjamin Kunbuor is an Acting Attorney-
General and Minister for Justice.



Madam Speaker: Yes.



Dr A. A. Osei: ls it official and from
Who? He is acting in addition to the
Ministry of the Interior. So, every time
somebody is appointed to act for their
Colleagues, should we be publishing it
here? It is a practice? The fact that it is in
the public domain does not mean that we
should pick it and make it factual.



Mr Joseph Y. Chireh: Madam Speaker,
first of all, this publication that my Hon
Colleague is referring to is only for the
day Parliament is reconvening that this
information is provided. Now, this
information is provided on the Ministers,
Deputy Ministers, Regional Ministers and
their Deputies. [An Hon Member: By
who?] That has been the practice since

1993.



Now, the position he is talking about,
when an official statement is issued by
the President, accepting or asking an Hon
Minister to step aside and then another
Hon Minister to act in his stead, that is
official notice to all of us. The report in
the newspapers is just what the President
has indicated. So, there is no issue
involved in this.

[107]

[MR CHIREH]



Number two, to enforce what my Hon
Leader said, the practice has been that
those Hon Ministers who have been
vetted before by the Appointments
Committee, the moment it is announced
that they have been moved to another
Ministry, that becomes the official notice
again from the Presidency.



Yesterday, for instance, the President’s
Secretary issued a statement and it is
notice. If Parliament now desires that even
in the ministerial re-arrangement or
reshuffle, Parliament should be informed
officially, again, it can be done. But this is
not required at all by any of our Standing
Orders.



I would want to emphasise that this
practice is only for the day of the
reconvening. It is not everyday that the
you put in the Hansard when - and I am
saying that appropriate information has
been provided by the President.



Mr Hackman Owusu-Agyemang:
Madam Speaker, I believe that my very
good Friend has got it all confused. 



The point being advocated here is that,
what goes into the official records is what
we have done officially in this House.
Madam Speaker, every time there are
changes and there is no need for you to
refer to the Appointments Committee, we
do not publish it in the official records.
That is the only point being canvassed
here by the Hon Member for Old Tafo.
Therefore, if in the past, we have done
this, it does not matter.



But what he is saying is that once it
has been recorded here officially, it means
that one way or the other, either Madam
Speaker has been informed or that on the
floor of the House, this statement has been
made.



But Madam Speaker, having said that,
let me proceed to add that it is being done
by all governments - but I tend to believe
that it is not the right way to go. Madam

[108]

Speaker, I wonder whether communication
to your goodself must be made public
before it comes to you. In other words, I
am saying that it is not the best of
practices when the letter being written to
the Third Lady of the nation and to this
august House, should then be given to
the public, to the press before it comes to
your goodself.



So, even though the practice has been
that the Presidential Spokesperson will
announce this or that, maybe, the time has
come to revisit that particular issue. This
is because I sincerely believe that issues
to be put before you should not be in the
public domain before your goodself reads
it and before the House has been
informed. 



So, I believe that the Hon Leader must
take it in good faith that the point being
canvassed by the Hon Member for Old
Tafo is that, once it has not been officially
done here, it cannot be recorded in our
official book. Otherwise, the next time -
I heard rumours that the Hon Majority
Leader was going to be removed and then
you go ahead and put it in the official
record that the Hon Majority Leader is
going to be removed. Or you hear that
Hon Yieleh Chireh is going to go, then
put it there. You cannot do that. It is
against the rules; you cannot do that.



Madam Speaker: Hon Member, there
is a difference between that and the report
in the papers that the President has said
that somebody is going to be shifted; is -it
there? Or just ordinary rumour that I heard.
So, let us differentiate that.



Dr Mathew O. Prempeh - rose -



Madam Speaker: Yes, let your front
bencher speaks first. I will come to you.



Yes, Hon Member for Sekondi, let us
hurry up with this.

[109]

Papa Owusu-Ankomah: Madam
Speaker, events occur for us to take a look
at past and existing practices and see how
best we can put in place measures that
will strengthen our democratic ethos and
government. I raised this matter sometime
yesterday. 



Madam Speaker, what you are saying
is entirely correct; however, we transact
business of government on the floor of
this House. And my experience in
government is that, when we even have
reshuffles, the Hon Ministers who do not
need to be vetted, do not immediately take
over. There is usually a time lapse. But it
is dealt with administratively. It is not
known by the House but that also creates
problems for us.



So, I think in all these things - it may
help in terms of parliamentary business
and the conduct of government business
for the Hon Majority Leader to be able to
advise the House when the Hon Ministers
are even supposed to assume duty, even
though it has not been done in the past.
It is really not the best. Of course, we may
take cognisance of public announce-
ments.



Now, we know that Hon E. T. Mensah
is the Hon Minister for Water Resources,
Works and Housing. Can we recognise
him? Hon Alban Bagbin is the Hon
Minister for Health. Probably, in the letters
advising them, it may not be immediate
but this House does not know. So, do we
entertain Hon Bagbin as the Hon Minister
for Water Resources, Works and
Housing? So, I am saying that we are
dealing with governance; as a nation, we
progress.



So, the Leadership, together with
Madam Speaker, may discuss these things
and find a way which will enable us move
ahead democratically. But to be dogmatic
and say that this was what we have been

[110]

doing in the past, I do not think it will
really helps us. After all, we are growing.
Somebody was 10 years, 30 or 40 years
ago. He is now not 10 years. We are
growing.



Dr Prempeh: Madam Speaker,
gradually our first week is coming to an
end and we have not had any Question
time with any of the Hon Ministers.



Madam Speaker: Oh, let us finish with
this matter first.



Dr Prempeh: Madam Speaker, when
you look at the official publication, Ghana
has no Hon Minister for Education. At no
time has the Ministry of Education been
vacant. Somebody may have resigned, but
somebody was immediately appointed to
act. Why do we not have Acting Hon
Minister for Education, Enoch Teye
Mensah’s name appearing? This is
because he was named at the same time
as the Acting Minister for Education.



So, I think, all in all, we should be
careful what we put down. Because on
this official transaction, there is no
Minister for Education in Ghana, which
is probably not right because Enoch Teye
Mensah, (Hon Member of Parliament for
Ningo/Pramprarn) is the Acting Minister
for Education.



Madam Speaker: Yes, Leadership, in
view of this, what do you say to the
proposals suggested?



11.20 am.



Mr Osei Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Madam
Speaker, I was just going to say what the
Hon Member for Manhyia has said. But
further to that, the list of Cabinet Ministers
that we have in this country is 19.
[Interruption.]



Dr A. A. Osei: No. No. Not more than

19.



Mr Kyei-Mensah-B onus: Please, I
have not said it is more than 19.



Dr A.A. Osei: You said it is 19.



Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: That is what
I said.

[111]

[MR KYEI-MENSAH-BONSU]



The list that we have here is 19. Today,
what we have here is 18 and are we then
to take it that the list of Cabinet Ministers
is 18? It is 19. But for Education, there is
a blank. Even though on the 24th, when
we first met here, she had resigned and
the President had accepted the
resignation. Certainly, when she resigned
and the President admitted, there would
be somebody nominated by the President
to be responsible for that Ministry.



Why is it that, that person has not
been captured here? That is, if he goes
along, what has been done with respect
to Dr Benjamin Kunbuor. And may I
know whether the name is "Kumbuor" or
"Kunbuor"? Is it "m" or "n"? l thought it
was ‘m’ -"Kumbuor", and not
"Kunbuor". [Interruptions] It is K -- u -
n? All right.l would want to be educated
on that. I have always assumed that the
name was "Kumbuor", that is with ‘m’.



Madam Speaker, so there is that
inconsistency regarding how it has been
captured. In that case, if he adopts this
procedure, then the Minister who was
nominated to be responsible for
Education ought to have also been
appropriately so captured. So that leaves
the inconsistency.



If we have to do that, if we have to
resort to that, let us do that, otherwise,
we could say that for the Attorney-General
and Ministry of Justice, there was
nobody responsible to the best, of the
knowledge of this House. So for
consistency, let us adopt one method and
I believe we would be covered.



Madam Speaker: I think the basic
issue, if I take all that have been said
together, is that when we are listing
Ministers and considering changes, I

[112]

know you would talk about what happens
on the day. But this was a day before and
I think it is the 24th. If that is so, 25th things
happened, 26th things happened, 27th
things happened, and I think the real issue
is, we should really know the official
position, not get it from the newspapers.



But a real official position - they are
expecting that you as Leader of the House
should be able to inform us. Of course,
you would not be able to inform us what
would happened later to that day, but the
day that this is coming out, we should
know the official position. I think this is
the issue.



What do you say to that?



Mr Avoka: Madam Speaker, I think that
the issues raised are quite interesting and
quite valid. My position is, I do not want
it to be the case that what is happening is
a departure from what has happened in
the past. I think we have been talking the
same language. We agree that, one,
Ministers who are newly nominated, their
names would have to come here, appear
before the Appointments Committee,
vetted and approved; we understand.



But Ministers who have previously
been vetted and appointed as such,
normally, when they are swapping
Ministries, the communication does not
come to Parliament officially. We normally
take the information in the public domain.
But in terms of good practices and having
regard to the fact that these days there
are mistakes in announcing who goes
where, who is even removed, I think that
it is in order that the Presidency also sends
a list of those who are swapping places to
Parliament because many of them do
business in this House.



This is also to indicate when those
replacements take effect, so that the issue
that was raised by Hon Papa Owusu-
Ankomah would be catered for, that this
Minister is going there, it takes effect from
this day, so that when the Minister comes

[113]

[MRAVOKA] 



here, we know whether he is dealing with
the Ministry of the Interior or the
Attorney-General or both. I think that that
one is in order.



But article 76 (I) of the Constitution
says that the Cabinet consists of the
President, the Vice President and not less
than 10 and not more than 19 Cabinet
Ministers. So 19 is a ceiling, but the
minimum is lO. So if there are 18 Cabinet
Ministers or 17 Cabinet Ministers, so
much the better for us in terms of the
financial commitment that we have to go
through.



So Madam Speaker, we are talking the
same language; we have the same
concerns. I only do not want it to be seen
as if the practice has been that, if there is
a reshuffle and one Minister is moving
from one Ministry to the other, hitherto,
the information came to us officially and
this time it is not coming and therefore,
that is a worry. No! We all agreed that
since 1993, this has been the practice.
But we are improving every year, every
time and I am in line with the concept of
improvement of governance. 



So I will take this matter up and urge
that the full complement of the list should
come and when they take effect,
Parliament should get to know, so that
business can be done here smoothly.



Madam Speaker: Yes, so shall we go
on then, with correction of the Official
Report of Tuesday, the 24th of January,

2012?



Any other corrections? [ Pause. ]



Hon Members in the absence of any
corrections, the Official Report of
Tuesday, the 24" of January, 2012 is
hereby adopted as the true record of
proceedings.



Leader, I think we now move to item 4
on the Order Paper.

[114]

Mr Avoka: The Chairman of the
Committee is ready and the Hon Minister
for Finance and Economic Planning is also
in the House. We are grateful to the
Minister for coming. We welcome him to
the House for the first time.



Madam Speaker: We are happy he is
here. He has to come. Does he not, to
move the Resolution?



MOTIONS

Waiver of Tax and Duty Liabilities
on Equipment and Materials for the
Mampong Water Supply Rehabili-
tation and Expansion Project



Chairman of the Committee (Mr
James K. Avedzi): Madam Speaker, I beg
to move, that this Honourable House
adopts the Report of the Finance
Committee on the request for waiver of
tax and duty liabilities on equipment and
materials to be imported or purchased
locally in the sum of four million, six
hundred and sixty-six thousand, eight
hundred and thirty-three United States
dollars (US$4,666,833.00) and corporate
and expatriate income taxes amounting to
one million, three hundred and sixty-eight
thousand, one hundred and thirty-nine
Ghana cedis, thirty-eight Ghana pesewas
(GH¢l,368,l39) in respect of the
Mampong water supply rehabilitation and
expansion project.



Madam Speaker, I present your
Committee’s Report.



1.0 Introduction



The request for waiver of tax liabilities
on equipment and materials to be
imported or purchased locally, corporate
as well as expatriate income taxes in the

[115]

[MRAVEDZI]



sum of US$4,666,833.00 and
GH¢ 1,368,13938 respectively, in respect
of Mampong water supply rehabilitation
and expansion project was laid in the
House on Tuesday, 20th December, 2011
and referred to the Finance Committee for
consideration and report in accordance
with article 103 of the Constitution and
Order 169 of the Standing Orders of the
House.



The Committee met and considered the
request with the Hon Deputy Minister for
Finance and Economic Planning, Mr Seth
Terkpeh and the Deputy Minister for
Water Resources, Works and Housing,
Maj. (Dr) (Alhaji) Mustapha Ahmed (retd)
and officials from the two sector Ministries
and presents this Report.



2.0 Background



Mampong is a growing municipality in
the Ashanti Region with current
population of 58,000 inhabitants and a
huge potential for agro industrial
processing. The capacity of the existing
water supply system (2,500m3/day) which
depends on raw water abstract from River
Kyeremfa, a tributary of River Afram is
inadequate to meet the increasing demand
leading to serious Water supply shortages
during the dry season. 



The Mampong water supply system
was rehabilitated in 1998. The rehabilitation
and expansion of the system is therefore
aimed at meeting the demand for potable
water in the municipality up to the year
2020 for a projected population of
approximately 90,000 people. 



The scope of works, supply for services
and the rehabilitation project include:

[116]

design and engineering;



dredging of impoundment weir to
increase storage capacity;



rehabilitation of existing water
treatment plant; .



rehabilitation of booster stations;



construction of additional 2,500m3/
day Water Treatment Plant;



new water transmission pipelines;



rehabilitation and extension of
distribution network;



installation of community stand-
pipes;



construction of sludge Treatment
Facility; and 



technical and post-construction
operational support.



The project aims at enabling Ghana
Water Company Limited enhance access
to potable water and improve productivity
of the inhabitants. This will pave the way
for economic development, growth and
poverty reduction It would also boost
business opportunities mainly industrial
and commercial activities and maximize
the social and health benefits of clean and
reliable drinking water. 



3.0 Approval of the Credit Agreement



Parliament on Tuesday, 7th May, 2010
approved by Resolution the Credit
Agreement between the Government of
Ghana and the Export-Import Bank of the

[117]

[MRAVEDZI]

United States ofAmerica for an amount
of twenty-three million, one hundred
and twelve thousand, seven hundred
and twenty-three US dollars
(US$23,122,723.00) for the construction
of the Mampong water supply
expansion project.



4.0 Required waiver



The total amount of taxes liabilities of
equipment materials; and corporate as
well as expatriate income taxes required
to be waived is the sum of US$4,666,833
and GH¢ 1,368, 139.38 respectively.



Attached as Appendix 1-6 are
assessments conducted by the Customs,
Excise and Preventive Service (CEPS) on
the tax liability to be waived and expatriate
income tax required.



5.0 Observations



The Committee noted that tax
assessment was made on the following
by the (CEPS):



One unit station wagon
pipes and utensils - US$6,002,l90.00



Three units D/C pick-ups and
two units saloon cars--US$l40,942.00



One unit crane-mounted
truck pumps, printers,
scanner, desktop computer,
laptop and software - US$737,617.00



Water treatment plant
accessories, building
and civil materials,
electrical equipment,
photocopies, fax
machines - US$6,889,200.00



Total tax liability-US$4,666,833.00

[118]

The Committee observed that the
project is being financed by the
Government of Ghana and the Export-
Import Bank of the United States of
America at the cost of twenty-three million,
one hundred and twelve thousand, seven
hundred and twenty-three US dollars
(US$23,l12,723.00). 



The Committee noted that the facility
will enable Ghana Water Company Limited
enhance access to potable water and
improve productivity of the inhabitants-
It would pave the way for economic
development, growth and poverty
reduction. It would also boost business
opportunities mainly industrial and
commercial activities and maximize the
social and health benefits of clean and
reliable drinking water.



The Committee has carefully
considered the request and found that the
tax waiver is necessary for the smooth
implementation of the Mampong Water
supply rehabilitation and Expansion
project.



The Committee, therefore, recom-
mends to the House to adopt this Report
and approve by Resolution, the waiver of
tax liability on equipment and materials,
corporate Income Taxes as wells as
Expatriate income tax in the sum of four
million, six hundred and sixty-six
thousand, eight hundred and thirty-three
United States dollars (US$4,666,833.00)
and one million, three hundred and sixty-
eighty thousand, one hundred and thirty-
nine Ghana cedis, thirty-eight pesewas
(GH¢1,368,139.38) respectively, for the
Mampong water supply rehabilitation and
expansion project in accordance with
article 174(2) of the Constitution.



Respectfully submitted.

[119]

[MR AVEDZI]



[Table]

[120]

[MR AVEDZI]



[Table]

[121]

[MR AVEDZI]



[Table]

[122]

[MR AVEDZI]



[Table]

[123]

[MR AVEDZI]



[Table]

[124]

[MR AVEDZI]



[Table]

[125]

[MR AVEDZI]

[table]

[126]

[MR AVEDZI]

[table]

[127]

[MR AVEDZI]



INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE

[COAT OF ARM]

In case of reply the number and date of this
letter should be quoted @ 2280 



[MR AVEDZI]



[logo]



GHANA REVENUE AUTHORITY

DOMESTIC TAX REVENUE DIVISION



The Managing Director
Ghana Water Company Ltd
P.O.Box M194
Accra.



Dear sir



REQUEST FOR CONFIRMATION OF CORPORATE AND

EXPATRIATE INCOME TAX ASSESSMENT FOR MAMPONG 

WATER SUPPLY EXPANSION AND REHABILITATIONS PROJECT

IN ASHANTI REGION



We acknowledge receipt of your letter dated November 15,2010 on the above subject



The corporate and expatriate income tax for the Mampong Water Supply and rehabilitation project are as computed below.
[table]

[128]

Office of the commissioner of Internal Revenue 
Internal Revenue Service,
Headquarters,
Off Kinbu Road
P.O.Box 2202,Accra, Ghana.



26th November, 2010

[129]

[MRAVEDZI]



The total tax liability for the period of exemption from September 2011 to September 2012 Is GH¢1,368,I39.38 made up as follows:
GHc
Corporate Tax 1,084,632.00
Expatriate PAYE 283507.38

1,368,139.38



Please be advised accordingly.

. 

Yours faithfully





[Signature]
For: COIWMISSIONER



cc: commissioner
Ag. Head, Operations

[131]

11.30 am.



Ranking Member of the Committee
(Dr Anthony A. Osei: Madam Speaker, I
beg to second the Motion numbered 4 on
the Order Paper.



Madam Speaker, tax waivers for
projects like water should ordinarily not
be controversial. I would want to invite
the Hon Minister for Finance and
Economic Planning and the rest of my Hon
Colleagues for us to start taking a good
look at the items for which we give waivers
to. 



Madam Speaker, if you look at
Appendix I of the attachment to the
Cornmittee’s Report, you would notice the
items that are listed -



"One unit station wagon, pipes and
fittings, cement, paints, office desks,
chairs, cabinets, tables, shelves,
digital camera, stationery. . ."



Madam Speaker, this nation ought to
take a bold position that even though we
are borrowing money and that we agree
to give tax waivers, materials that can be
easily found here, we should decide not
to give tax waivers. Tax waivers in this
sense are a loss of taxes to the country. I
mean "coffee" - Madam Speaker, there
is "coffee" somewhere; and we are giving
tax waiver for items like coffee.



I think the Hon Minister should get a
team in his office to start coming up with
a list of items for which we would not be
giving tax waivers. If it is technological
transfer for items that do not exist here, it
is easily understandable. But coffee,
staples, Madam Speaker, it is getting too
much. Laptops and software - laptops;
we have rlg being assembled here. If we
do not have a mounted crane, that is all
right. But the list is not good -

[132]

"stationery, tonner, microwave", all these
items are easily found here. And I think
we ought to be taking a good look - Hon
Minister - I think I would want your
Ministry -



Madam Speaker, I am addressing the
Hon Minister and he is in conversation
with his Minister-designate for
Employment and Social Welfare -



Madam Speaker: Hon Minister for
Finance and Economic Planning -



Dr A. A. Osei: I was talking to him
because - I am addressing the Chair but
he ought to be taking notes.



Madam Speaker, this list here - I think
Ghana Revenue Authority (GRA) should
assist us in coming up with a list for which
We shall not grant tax Waivers. This is
Because these items that are listed here
certainly, do not represent the best.



If you look at the value, it is listed on
page 4, that the first item alone is 6 million;
I do not know how many coffees were there
or how many staples were in that value of
6 million. But I think it is a serious matter
and my advice is that all of us should be
putting our heads together to be coming
up with a list for which we should not be
granting tax waivers. Otherwise, I think
this is something that we have already
approved the loan for and I urge all my
Hon Colleagues to support the Motion.



I thank you.



Question proposed.



Mr Hackman Owusu-Agyemang (NPP
-New Juaben North): Madam Speaker,
I believe that the Hon Member for Old
Tafo has raised a point but left it halfway,
really. 



Madam Speaker, I am laying to say that
although that had been the practice, this
waiver of taxes and duties tend to distort
the value of the projects that we

[133]

[MR OWUSU-AGYEMANG]



eventually approve here. Inasmuch as
Parliament is the only body that can Waive
these taxes, I believe that in certain
instances, the Hon Minister will do well
to advise us because there is what we call
double taxation rules that we have.



With several countries in the world, we
have double taxation. So if they pay the
taxes here, they are not supposed to pay
it in the United Kingdom (UK) or in
Germany. I myself had the privilege of
signing some of these - at least,
initialling them. Therefore, if they say that
the taxes on the expatriate staff coming
here are not being paid, what we must make
sure is Whether they are paying it in their
country of origin. This is because the
double taxation, Madam Speaker, really
means that you pay in Ghana and then
you do not pay in your country of origin.



So they short-change us by not paying,
and they do not report there because they
say they are working outside, and they
do not pay there too. So we have to
monitor this very, very carefully and as
my Hon Colleague said, we" do need to
take cognizance of all these things. We
have done it in the past; we would
continue to do it.



But Madam Speaker, I sincerely believe
that the time has now come for the Hon
Minister for Finance and Economic
Planning to do a comprehensive analysis
of this and let us know whether these
waivers, eventually, are in a way
subtracted from the total cost of the
project.



I mean, Madam Speaker, when you look
at the projects, the cost for the vehicles
and all of them are debited not at the ex-
factory prices, but sometimes at the local
prices. But at the same time, they want a
waiver. So the waiver, I am not so sure,
eventually inure to the benefit of the
people of Ghana.

[134]

So I would like to submit that the Hon
Minister, fortunately, is here today- our
good Friend would do a very
comprehensive study of these waivers. In
some cases, they are huge, especially
when you find that you have a 133-million
dollar project, 16 million dollars of it is just
insurance and all these things and then
eventually, they, who are enjoying these-
high salaries and benefits are the ones Who
are absolved from paying the taxes- And
then the ordinary Ghanaian who is
borrowing, who is being fleeced, is then
not benefiting from it.



So inasmuch as I support the Motion,
I would like to humbly request the Hon
Minister to let one of his staff to really
delve deep into these issues and find out.
This is because many a time, we approve
frivolous exemptions and at the end of the
day, as I said, it does not benefit us. But
as I said, where we have double taxation
agreements, then Madam Speaker, we
would like to know whether this has been
taken good cognizance of This is because
I believe they must pay it to us and then
refuse to pay it to the United Kingdom
(U.K). The United Kingdom has made so
much money, so has Holland and most of
these countries. Then they rather go and
pay to Holland or UK. instead of paying
it to us. And the laws are very clear,
Madam Speaker; and that is what I also
want us to canvass.



Mr Moses Asaga (NDC - Nabdam):
Madam Speaker, I think this is a standard
practice where there is always a waiver
for such projects. And I think this
particular loan is meant for a water project
in Mampong and it is the ordinary people
of Mampong who should be rejoicing,
that such a loan agreement has been
approved and there is a waiver for taxes.

[135]

[MR ASAGA]



Madam Speaker, if you look at the
project, we are talking of a population of
58,000 and this would increase to 90,000.
Therefore, if you were to divide 4.6 million
approximately by 90,000, you can see that
this is very beneficial and the cost benefit
analysis would be very, very good.



Madam Speaker, so I urge all Hon
Members to approve this tax waiver.



Thank you, Madam Speaker.



11.40 am. 



Mr Albert Kan-Dapaah (NPP -
Afigya-Sekyere West): Madam Speaker,
I am much aware of the water problems
confronting the people of Mampong and
I was one of those people who were very
happy when the loan came.



But Madam Speaker, just a couple of
issues -- the first one of which my Hon
Colleague, Hon Dr Akoto Osei has talked
about.The exemption that they seek refer
to items such as microwave, coffee maker
and utensils. This is scandalous.
Obviously, the agreement granting them
the tax exemptions was not thinking of
items like these. If we are not careful, the
next time they come, it will be for their
clothes, their personal clothing. and
obviously, we need to have a second look
at this.



Madam Speaker, the second issue I
would want to raise, is that We have the
duty as Parliament to go through this
exemption and give it to them but we also
have an oversight responsibility and I
would have been more comfortable -
today somebody was telling us, yes, the
goods have arrived and that they are
being used in Mampong and whether the
project is going on at all. We have no

[136]

such assurance. We are being asked to
grant the exemptions.
I think it will be better if in future such
reports can come with reports probably,
from other committees to certify that, yes,
the work is going on satisfactorily, the
equipment, we have seen and that we are
all right to give them the exemptions. Just
to be very sure that we are not giving them
exemptions which they will use for other
purposes.



This is because we are witnesses to all
sort of things that can happen in the
developing world and also in our country.
So if we can be a bit careful and exercise
that oversight responsibility, I think it will
be in order.



In any case, Madam Speaker, as I said,
I am very much aware of the difficulties
confronting the people of Mampong as
far as water is concerned and just as I
Sllpp0riI6(l the original loan agreement, I
have no problem supporting in principle
the tax waiver, except to put on record that
I find granting tax exemptions for
microwaves, coffee makers and utensils
rather a bit scandalous -



Madam Speaker: I think that is why it
was suggested that the Minister for
Finance and Economic Planning should
go into matters and let us have the list of
things. It is a good suggestion.



One thing I noticed in the Report as I
was reading it, I saw Mampong,
Mampong, Mampong and I know of two
Mampongs in Ghana. In fact, I know very
well Akuapim-Mampong. So I said, "Oh,
this is good for the Akuapim-Mampong"
water and nothing said about Ashanti
Mampong until I went to the title and I
suppose that answers my question.



Mr Joseph Y. Chireh (NDC - Wa
West): Madam Speaker, I also support
this Motion for the waiver because water
is life and it is important that it is being

[137]

[MRCHIREH] 



provided. Some of the comments that my
Hon Colleagues have made, valid as they
seem to be, it is not possible for us to
know what stage the implementation is,
unless we give the waiver for the
equipment and materials to come as some
of them have suggested. I believe the
principle is for us to ensure that we give
the waiver for taxes, so that the clearance
and all these would not be on our
account.



The second issue which deals with
What types of items are being exempted
has to be indicated in the contract that
has already been signed and in that case,
it is not when the contract has been
signed and it is operational that one raises
this issue. It is for those who signed this
contract to ab initio indicate that these
things do not include personal items, in
which case, Parliament will be guided by
the agreement. So once again, it is good
that we are raising these issues but we
have to do so at the appropriate level and
time.



Madam Speaker, I thank you for the
opportunity.



Mr Hackman Owusu-Agyemang: On
a point of order.



Madam Speaker, we are not saying that
We have not done this in the past. We are
saying it is time now maybe, to take a look
at the whole practice and to see how best
we can make efficacious and to the benefit
of the people of Ghana. That is all that we
are saying. They must not make it look
as if we are against the project.



We have supported it fully; We continue
to support it but we think that a few things
need to be looked at as we develop in the
nation. So our systems must also develop
in tandem with our process and especially
to avoid the situation where money, which

[138]

should come to us rather would be paid
to the metropolis. That is what we are
saying.



Madam Speaker: I think, Hon
Hackman, that is true. He is only
supporting what you said by saying that
there is a time that we should make this
very clear instead of calling on the Hon
Minister to set it out. He is saying that at
the beginning, before the goods arrive,
they should know. 



Mr Kan-Dapaah: Madam Speaker, I
was also wondering. Going by the tone
of the Memorandum, it appears the goods
are already here- If, indeed,-. they are
here, on What basis did the Customs,
Excise and Preventive Service (CEPS)
allow them to take them when they do
not have this specific approval? They
need to have the approval before they
release them.



So if the Hon Minister, in winding up,
can tell us how come somebody at CEPS
was so brave to waive the taxes even
before this august House has approved
them.



Madam Speaker: We will get him to
say but does it not happen all the time?



Yes, let us have the last contribution
before we come to you for answering this
point. 



Minority Leader (Mr Kyei-Mensah-
Bonsu): Madam Speaker, I speak in
support of the Motion but there are a few
things that are not very clear.



Madam Speaker, page 4 of the Report,
"Observations". We are told of the
procurement of one unit crane-mounted
truck. Then alongside, we have the
procurement of pumps, printers, scanner,
desktop computer, laptop and software.
Altogether, the cost comes to

US$737,617.00.

[139]

[MR KYEI-MENSAH-BONSU]



Madam Speaker, as it is before us, how
do we know the cost of the one unit crane-
mounted truck? We do not know. They
have lumped everything together and they.
are seeking an exemption; yet they do not
tell us What the cost of the item is. What
kind of arrangement is that? So we are
not doing justice to ourselves if we
approve of this in this form. As it is, if we
walk out of here and l am asked what was
the cost of the truck, and what was the
exemption sought for the truck, what
would I say?



Madam Speaker, to page 3 -
"Approval of the Credit Agreement". We
are told that - [Interruption]



Mr Avedzi: On a point of order.



Madam Speaker, the issue that the Hon
Minority Leader is raising is an
observation of the Committee. We have
also observed that the cost of the crane
and other items were lumped together and
that cost that figure. It is not a
recommendation that we are giving but it
is the observation of the Committee and I
would want to draw his attention to that.



Madam Speaker: I think what he said
- Is the US$737 the cost of the tax
exemption that you are talking about?



Mr Avedzi: Madam Speaker, the figure
is the cost, on which the tax is computed.



Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Madam
Speaker, I believe the Hon Chairman of
the Committee has just confirmed what I
have said. He has not added anything to
it. I am saying that is improper. That is
the point I am making. They are seeking
exemption and then instead of letting us
know what the cost is, put everything
together. And I am saying that if I am
asked, what is the cost of the truck, how
would I know? What is the cost of the
scanner, the printers - [Interruption]

[140]

Mr Asaga: On a point of order.



' Madam Speaker, he is making the
presentation as if he has discovered
something new. But the Committee has
already stated what he is stating. So for
him to now make it look like it is new, it is
an innovation, he analyzed to get to know
about it, is my problem. So he should
rather be reiterating but not to make i.t
sound like it is something new he has
discovered and that the Committee
shirked its responsibility. That is why we
said the Committee observed -



11.50 am. 



Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Madam
Speaker, clearly, l do not know what the
beef of the Hon Minister-designate is. l
am saying that, yes, he has made that
observation and based on that, he is
asking us to approve it. Is the Committee
telling us that we should not approve it?
The Committee is recommending that we
should approve it and I am saying that it
is not meaty enough; it is not
comprehensive enough. I do not know.



So please, he should listen carefully
before he rises up to speak to the matter.
Madam Speaker, that is the issue that I am
raising, that we are not doing justice to
ourselves. The Committee has observed
that this amount is on the aggregation of
these items. Now, if he is asked, the Hon
Moses Asaga, would he tell us what the
components are? Would he be able to tell
us? And yet he wants the House to
approve it. That is the difficulty.



The second thing is on page 3: -



"Parliament on Tuesday, 7* May,
2010 approved by Resolution the
Credit Agreement between the
Government of Ghana and the
Export~Import Bank of the United
States of America" for an amount
of twenty-three million, one
hundred and twelve thousand,
seven hundred and twenty-three
US dollars (US$23,l22,723.00) for

[141]

[MRKYELMENSAH-B ONSU]



the construction of the Mampong
Water Supply Expansion Project."



Madam_Speaker, when they come to
putting the matter in figures, they quote
another figure; and this is from the Finance
Committee. They say the amount is
US$23,1 12,723.00 and in another breath,
that the figure is US$23, 122,723.00. Which
is which? The Hon Chairman was
profused in denying what I said. Now, he
is nodding his head. Which is which?
"What should we approve of? So, clearly,
there is another mistake.



Madam Speaker: Hon Chairman, do
you want to correct anything?



Mr Avedzi: Madam Speaker, the correct
figure is the one in figures, not the one in
words. 



Madam Speaker: So, what will you
correct in the figures? What are you going
to correct in the figures?



Mr Avedzi: Madam Speaker, the
correction will be in words, "twenty-three
million, one hundred and twenty-two
thousand". So, we change-the "twelve"
to "twenty-two thousand".



Madam Speaker: Hon Minority
Leader, he has corrected it.



Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Madam
Speaker, thanks to the Hon Chairman for
ultimately agreeing to amend it, which is
what he ought to have done earlier. 



We are told in capital letters that the
rehabilitation expansion of the system is
aimed at meeting the demand for potable
water in the municipality up to the year
2020 for a projected population of
approximately 90,000 people - page 2.



I thought the Committee would have
done a better j ob if they had told us what

[142]

the demand is and what indeed, the per
capita delivery is going to be. Delivery of
the potable water, they are telling us the
demand - it is to satisfy the demand.
What is the demand for 90,000 people?
And what is going to be the per capita
delivery of potable water in this case?



Mr Asaga - rose -



Madam Speaker: Have you finished,
Hon Minority Leader? 



Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Madam
Speaker, he injected himself into the
discourse, so I sat down to allow him to
respond.



Madam Speaker: Oh, when you finish,
maybe, I will call upon him.



Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bosu: Madam
Speaker, I thought they would have done
us better service if they had also related
to that item. Having said that, the Hon
Chairman has responded to one but if he
could respond to the other two, I may be
convinced and persuaded to vote for it.
For now, I am not too sure.



Dr A. A. Osei: Madam Speaker, I would
not purport to answer all the questions
but what he is referring to goes back to
the issue we raised yesterday that in
future, it would be useful to table minutes
of the Committees Report, so that Hon
Members can have access to All the
information is available; this is an
executive summary, so it is not fully
captured. I think We will take note that
from now on, if all committees will begin
to table minutes - This is because
sometimes the reports are usually so
many you cannot put all of them here.



But the issue about the demand was
given to us and all the other information;
so I think that we will take note and try to

[143]

[DR A.A. OSEI]



table minutes. And the Clerks should also
be listening, so that they will table the
minutes and we can make reference to that
and I think it will only help the work of
Parliament.



Madam Speaker: I agree with you,
except that even as of yesterday and
today, only a few matters needed to have
come into this Report. The reports are
not as comprehensive as one would want
them to be like yesterday; important
matters are left untouched and it is not
helpful. But as you say, if you file it, then
it could be looked at. It is a roundabout
way but it is really to ask that the Report
should be more comprehensive to inform
the House. So I agree with you.



Hon Avedzi, can you wind up and tell
us -



Mr Avedzi: Madam Speaker, just in
response to the issue raised by the Hon
Minority Leader, in terms of the capacity
delivery of the pump. As we speak now,
the current state of the pump is 2,500 cubic
meter of water per day. This loan facility
is to expand that one to construct
additional capacity, the same capacity
again, so that by 2020, where the
population of that municipality will rise to
90,000 people, it would be able to cater for
that number.



That is what he is asking for; it is
provided in the Report because we have
the construction of additional 2,500 cubic
meters per day, in addition to what exists
already. So it is captured in the Report.



Madam Speaker: What about the
other - There was another matter.



Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Madam
Speaker, as the Hon Chairman said, it
brings the total capacity to 5,000 cubic
meters per day and I am asking how it
translates to per capita delivery because -

[144]

Of course, that one is computed normally
in gallons and we know the minimum as
prescribed by the United Nations. So, for
him to tell us that this will meet the
demand, he should be able to tell us what
the per capita delivery is. Can he respond
to that? 



MrAvedzi: Madam Speaker, lam not a
technical man in water delivery. I am a
finance man and so I take the information
provided by the technical people that this
will cater for the number of people who
will be living in that municipality. So I
cannot provide the information he is
asking me.



Madam Speaker: Well, these are
matters that should be taken note of. If
somebody raises a matter that he cannot
understand in the Report, it does not stop
the Report from being accepted. That was
a good answer to him that it could be
found, if you go to the technical people.
Is that your answer?



Dr A. A. Osei: Madam Speaker, the
Chairman already has the answer. I do
not know why he is shying away from it.
The 5,000 cubic meters divided by 9,000
will give one the per capita and so he
should give him the formula and then he
can get it. Per day - [Interruption.]



Madam Speaker: We will finish with
this and then I will put the Question. These
are matters that people can talk of. That
is what discussing the Report is all about.



Mr Asaga - rose -



Madam Speaker: Are you
contributing or you are telling us the
figure now?



Mr Asaga: Madam Speaker, the Hon
Minority Leader was a celebrated student
of planning, which included all these that
we are doing--water delivery. So I

[145]

[MRASAGA]



thought in terms of the per capita, he
should have rather been teaching me how
to do that calculation. So, it is in the
document, if we do the calculation as -
[Interruption] It is there -- 5,000 divided
by 90,000. 



12-00 noon.



Dr A. A. Osei: Hon Moses Asaga, this
is supply - [Laughter] Madam Speaker,
he is about to be vetted and he is already
giving misleading information to this
House. He should beware.



Madam Speaker: Yes, I think we have
had enough discussion and maybe,
committee Chairmen are learning some
little tips that should make their reports
comprehensive for the House. However,
I think this is the end of the debate.



Thank you. It is time to put the
Question now.



Mr Kan-Dapaah: Madam Speaker, I
thought the Hon Minister or the Chairman
was going to tell us, since the goods have
arrived and they have been given out, on
what basis did the authorities at Customs,
Excise and Preventive Service arrogate to
themselves that right to give out goods
without paying duty.



Mr Avedzi: Madam Speaker, it is true
that the goods have arrived but I am not
sure whether the goods have been given
out; if the goods have arrived, the Ghana
Revenue Authority will use the value of
those goods and come out with the
assessment and that is what we are
working with; if he has the evidence that
they have been given out, he should
provide it. I do not know but I know that
the goods have arrived.



Madam Speaker: I think he was just
asking.

[146]

Mr Kan~Dapaah: Madam Speaker, so
should it go on record that he says the
goods have not been given out, because
if they have been given out, a serious,
law of the la_nd would have been flouted?
So is he giving us the assurance -



Madam Speaker: Hon Kan~Dapaah, I
do not think he gave you the assurance.
He said he does not know and that is not
an assurance.



Mr Kan-Dapaah: Madam Speaker, the
Hon Minister is here -the Hon Minister
should give an assurance to the House
that nobody has flouted the laws of Ghana
by giving out the goods even before
Parliament has approved it. If somebody
has done that, please, let us take a serious
view of that and let us start processing
the papers for the officers to come to the
Public Accounts Committee -
[Hear!Hear!] 



Madam Speaker: Well, I like that rather
than the fact that somebody must
incriminate himself here. '



Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Madam
Speaker, I believe the Hon Minister knows
' the resort in these matters. He may tell us
- I think in this matter, the Hon Chairman
for the Finance Committee" does not have
the competence to respond to this. The
Hon Minister himself is here. Let the I-ion
Minister respond and we can assure
ourselves. 



In any event, Madam Speaker, I notice
conspicuously sitting behind the Minister
for Finance and Economic Planning is the
Hon Minister for Lands and Forestry -
Congratulations to him; he has been
retained. 



But Madam Speaker, he should know
that it does not give him any leeway to
appear in this House in the way he has
dressed - [Laughter]. At all.

[147]

Madam Speaker: Without a tie? All
right. He came without a tie - Yes, Hon
Members, let us be reminded that we
should dress properly for the House.



So Hon Members, let us take note of
the concerns raised by Hon Kan-Dapaah
and get on with the work. 



Question put and Motion agreed to.



Madam Speaker: Shall we now move
to the Resolution numbered 5? 



Mr Avoka: Madam Speaker, we can
take the consequential Resolution.



Madam Speaker: Hon Members, shall
we finish with this matter by calling on
the Hon Minister for Finance and
Economic Planning to move the
Resolution numbered 5?



Dr Kwabena Duffuor: Madam Speaker,
I beg to move, that Resolution number 5
as captured on pages 2 and 3 of today’s
Order Paper be moved now.



Mr James K. Avedzi: Madam Speaker,
I beg to second the Motion. 



Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Madam
Speaker, I believe the Motion moved by
the Hon Minister was to invite us to adopt
the Resolution captured as item 5 on
pages 2 and 3. 



Madam Speaker: Yes.



Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu; Madam
Speaker, but the Hon Minister just
implored us that he begs to move that this
item be moved now - [Interruptions] -
That is what he said. So I do not know
where we are.



Madam Speaker: Yes, Hon Minister,
you mean item 5 on the Order Paper?

[148]

Hon Minister for Finance and
Economic Planning, it is a Resolution but
you - Which item then on the Order
Paper?



RESOLUTIONS



Tax Waiver on Equipment and Materials
for Mampong Water Supply
Rehabilitation and Expansion Project



Minister for Finance and Economic
Planning (Dr Kwabena Duffuor): Madam
Speaker, I beg to move, that this
Honourable House is respectfully
requested to adopt the following
Resolution:



WHEREAS by the provisions of
article 174 (2) of the Constitution,
Parliament is empowered to confer
power on any person or authority
to waive or vary a tax imposed by
an Act of Parliament;



THE EXERCISE of any power
conferred, on any person or
authority to waive or vary a tax in
favour of any person or authority is
by the said provisions made subject
to the prior approval of Parliament
t by resolution;



BY THE COMBINED operation of
the provisions of section 26 (2) of
the Customs, Excise and Preventive
Service (Management) Law, 1993
(PNDCL 330), the Export and Import
Act, 1995 (Act 503), the Export
Development and Investment Fund
Act, 2000 (Act 582), the ValueAdded
Tax Act, 1998 (Act 546), the Value
Added Tax (Amendment) Act, 2000
(Act 579) and other existing Laws
and Regulations applicable to the
collection of customs duties and
other taxes on the importation of
goods into Ghana, the Minister for
Finance and Economic Planning
may exempt any statutory
corporation, institution or individual
from the payment of duties and
taxes, otherwise, payable under the
said laws and Regulations or waive

[149]

[DR DUFFUOR]



or vary the requirement of such
statutory corporation, institution or
individual to pay such duties and
taxes;
IN ACCORDANCE with the
provisions of the Constitution
and at the request of the
Government of Ghana, acting
through the Minister
responsible for Finance and
Economic Planning, there has
been laid before Parliament a
request by the Minister for
Finance and Economic Planning
for the prior approval of
Parliament the exercise by him of
his power under the Laws and
Regulations relating to the
waiver and exemption of taxes
and duties on equipment and
materials to be imported or
purchased locally in the sum of
four million, six hundred and
sixty-six thousand, eight
hundred and thirty-three United
States dollars (US$4,666,833.00)
and corporate and expatriate
income taxes amounting to one
million, three hundred and sixty~
eight thousand, one hundred
and thirty-nine Ghana cedis,
thirty-eight Ghana pesewas
(GH¢1,368,139.38) in respect of
the Mampong Water Supply
Rehabilitation and Expansion
Project.



NOW THEREFORE, this
Honourable House hereby
approves the exercise by the
Minister responsible for Finance
and Economic Planning of the
power granted to him by Parliament
by Statute to waive such taxes and
duties or to exempt the payment of
taxes and duties on equipment and
materials to be imported or
purchased locally in the sum of four
million, six hundred and sixty-six

[150]

thousand, eight hundred and thirty-
three United States dollars
(US$4,666,833.00) and corporate and
expatriate income taxes amounting
to one million, three hundred and
sixty-eight thousand, one hundred
and thirty-nine Ghana cedis, thirty-
eight Ghana pesewas
(GH¢ l ,368, 139.38) in respect of the
Mampong Water Supply
Rehabilitation and Expansion
Project. 



Mr James K. Avedzi: Madam Speaker,
I beg to second the Motion.



Question put and Motion agreed to.



Resolved accordingly. 



Dr A. A. Osei: Madam Speaker, Hon
Fritz Frederic Balfour, the Hon Minister
designate for information usually pays
attention and votes on Motions. Today,
he appears to be. abdicating his
parliamentary responsibility. He is not
even paying attention to the Motion. I
do not know whether the appointment is
submitting him into some - [Laughter]



Madam Speaker: Would it not if it
were you? [Laughter.]



Hon Leader, I think we should move
on to Motion number 6.



Mr Avoka: Yes, we will now come to
item number 6, on page 3, Motion 6.

Madam Speaker: The Motion 6 will
be taken by the First Deputy Speaker.



12.10 pm



[MR FIRST DEPUTY SPEAKER IN THE

CHAIR] 



Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, item 6 on the Order Paper.



Hon Minister for Finance and
Economic Planning?

[151]

BILLS-SECOND READING



National Fiscal Stabilisation Levy
(Repeal) Bill, 2011 



Minister for Finance and Economic
Planning (Dr Kwabena Duffuor): Mr
Speaker, l beg to move, that the National
Fiscal Stabilisation Levy (Repeal) Bill, 201 1
be now read a Second time.



Mr Speaker, the obj ect of the Bill is to
repeal the National Fiscal Stabilisation
Levy Act, 2009 (Act 785). This was
introduced in 2009 to raise additional
funds for national development for a
period of 18 months.



However, Mr Speaker, in 2011
Government extended the levy for
additional one year. Government in
fulfilment of its pledge, has decided to
discontinue this levy. 



Mr Speaker, I thank you.



Question proposed. 



Chairman of the Committee (Mr
James K. Avedzi): Mr Speaker, I rise to
support the Motion and in doing so,
present your Committee’s Report.



1.0 Introduction 



The National Fiscal Stbilization Levy
(Repeal) Bill, 201 1 was presented and read
the First time in the House on Friday, 16th
December, 2011 and, referred to the
Finance Committee for consideration and
report, in accordance with the Constitution
and Standing Orders of the House.



The Committee subsequently met and
considered the Bill with the Deputy
Minister for Finance and Economic
Planning, Hon Seth Terkpeh,
Commissioner-General of the Ghana
Revenue Authority and officials from the
Ministry of Finance and Economic
Planning (MOFEP) and the Ghana Revenue
Authority (GRA) and presents this Report

[152]

to the House pursuant to Order 161(1) of
the Standing Orders of the House.
2. Purpose of the Bill
1 The purpose of the Bill is to repeal the
National Fiscal Stabilization Levy Act,
2009 (Act 785). 



3.0Content of the Bill



The Bill contains a total of two (2)
clauses. 



Clause I repeals the National Fiscal
Stabilization Levy Act, 2009 (Act 785).



Clause 2 makes transitional provisions
to preserve the rights, liabilities and
obligations in existence immediately
before the commencement of this Act,
when passed. 



4.0 Observations



The Committee observed that the
National Fiscal StabihiationAct, 2009 (Act
785) was introduced in the second half of
the year 2009 to raise funds for national
development. Even though the Act was
initially for a period of eighteen (18)
months, Government extended the
duration of the levy for an additional one
year with a pledge to discontinue it
thereafter.



It was noted that this repeal Bill is in
fulfillment of the pledge by Government
to discontinue the levy.



5.0 Conclusion 



The Committee respectfully
recommends to the House to pass the
National Fiscal Stabilization Levy (Repeal)
Bill, 2011. 



Respectfully submitted.

[153]

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Ranking.Member of the Committee?



Dr A. A. Akoto: Mr Speaker, because
it affects business, the Hon Ranking
Member of the Committee on Trade,
Industry and Tourism has agreed to speak
on it.



Mr Isaac Osei (NPP - Subin): Mr
Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity
to say a few words on the repeal of the
National Fiscal Stabilisation Levy.



Mr Speaker, the first thing which comes
to mind is the effective date of this repeal
because it presupposes that the collection
is probably still going on until this
becomes effective. I hope that those
sectors which are paying are spared the
ordeal during this transition period.



Mr Speaker, the genesis of this
Stabilisation Levy was as a result of the
structures in the fiscal space faced by the
Ministry of Finance and Economic
Planning in fulfilling the obligations that
it has set for itself and the Government in
the budget, as Ia result of which this levy
was put in place, so that that space could
be broadened a little.



What worries me, ‘Mr Speaker, is that
anytime that there is lack of fiscal space,
we look only at the revenue side of the
balance and tax our people. But the truth
of the matter is that any tax which is placed
on companies increases the cost of doing
business. So this repeal could not have
come at a better time when businesses in
this country are suffering. So I am very
happy that the Government has now
repealed this and reduced the burden of
taxes on operating concerns in these
particular sectors.



I therefore, support the repeal of the
National Fiscal Stabilisation Levy
(Repeal) Bill, 2011 (Repeal) and hope that
this would be effective immediately to
reduce the cost of doing business in those
particular sectors.



I thank you, Mr Speaker.

[154]

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, this is a very straightforward
Bill, so let me take the last contribution
from the Hon Minority Chief Whip.



Mr Frederick Opare~Ansal1 (NPP -
Suhum): Mr Speaker, thank you for
giving me the opportunity to contribute
to the Motion on the floor.



Mr Speaker, at the Committee, some of
us felt that this was an exercise in futility.
Mr Speaker, if you look at the original Act,
clause 4 is very clear as to which years
that the law was applicable to; and if you
look at the current Bill that we are looking
at, it still makes saving for any obligations
that may exist during the period that the
law was in effect. So really, What are we
doing?



The law itself died after the expiration
of effective period and saved those same
obligations and liabilities during the
period. Now, we spend good
parliamentary time at committee and in
plenary doing the same thing that the Bill
itself empowered itself to do. 



But if you insist, I support that we pass
this Motion.



Mr First Deputy Speaker: No. Hon
Member, it is not for me - mine is to put
the Question. [Laughter] Mine is to put
the Question for the House to decide. You
are trying to raise a very important legal
point but you yourself, it appears you are
not too sure of the point that you raised.



Mr Opare~Ansah: Mr Speaker, I am
very sure of my point.



Mr First Deputy Speaker: Very well.



Mr Joseph Y. Chireh (NDC - Wa
West): Mr Speaker, I support this Motion
and I think that we should all vote for it.



The purpose of the Bill is clear; it is
avoidance of doubt and not to consider it

[155]

[MR CHIREH]



as a spent legislation which has a period
by itself. So this House must send a clear
message that this Bill repeals the Act and
in doing so, we are notifying the whole
community of industries that were
affected by this. That is why it is also a
notice to the whole world that Government
has kept faith with its pledge to end the
Stabilisation Levy and therefore, we
should not have any doubt whether we
are doing the right thing or not.



I urge all Hon Members to vote for it.



Minority Leader (Mr OSei Kyei-
Mensah-Bonsu): Mr Speaker, I think I
would want to go on the lines of the Hon
Minority Chief Whip.



As he said, the Bill or the law, when it
was introduced in this House, was time-
bound. It was supposed to end in 2010,
that is, at the end of fiscal year 2010. The
Hon Minister subsequently came to this
House to have it extended for another year
- again, time-bound. So with the
expiration of the fiscal year on 31st
December, 201 1, unless the Hon Minister
chose to extend it further, certainly, on 11th
December, 2011, it expired; that regime
expired automatically. 



Mr Speaker, what are we seeking to
achieve, now that we are doing this, not
on 31st December, 2011 but 26* January,
2012? What happens in the period
between 31st December, 2011 and now?
Would we say that it is legal?



Clearly, I think this is an exercise that
is unnecessary. 



12.20 p.m.



Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Minority Leader, when the Hon Minority
Chief Whip raised the point, I was carried
away, but when I looked at clause 2 of the
Bill again, I see it is a saving clause. So if

[156]

somebody or a certain right has accrued,
then that right has to be pursued. So I
think that the main important point of this
Bill, really, is that saving clause 2 of the
Bill.



But with regard to the clause 1, you
have a very important point there because
it is time-bound. In terms of clause 2, it is
very, very key because if somebody is
liable to pay within that period and he did
not pay, an obligation is on him to pay. A
certain right has already accrued by law,
so it will protect that right and that
obligation in clause 2 of the Bill.



Dr A. A. Osei: Mr Speaker, I do not
even think that we should think that clause
1 is not necessary. We need to know -



Mr First Deputy Speaker; The point
I made is that, that submission is in relation
to clause 1. 



Dr A. A. Osei: Yes.



Mr First Deputy Speaker: That is the
point I made.



Dr A. A. Osei: I am saying in clause 1,
we assume that all of us know the exact
decision we took. It is not clear in the Bill
what decision we took. We cannot look
at it and say we therefore, extended it for
a year; we should go back and look at
exactly what decision we took. Because
we were not sure, this Report is for the
avoidance of doubt. But we are sitting
here saying that we extended it for one
year. We may have amended it in such a
way that- [Interruptions.] 



Mr Speaker, this is why we said, for
the avoidance of doubt, let us repeal it, so
that nobody will have it in doubt. This is
because it is not automatic that we
extended it for one year and the language
we chose.

[157]

Mr Joe Ghartey (NPP - Esikadu/
Ketan): Mr Speaker, what has been
happening in the House this morning is
very unparliamentary This is because it
is the practice of the House to- extend
courtesies to Speakers. Like the Hon Rt
Hon Speaker, if it is New Year, we wish her
happy New Year; birthday, we wish her
happy birthday and so on. We have done
that for her.



But Mr Speaker, you are also a Speaker;
the Speakership is a Trinity; the Speaker,
First Deputy and Second Deputy
Speakers. You have gone unopposed but
nobody has congratulated you. So I rise
to congratulate you -



Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, you are out of order. [Laughter.]
Hon Member, there is a Motion on the
floor.



Mr Albert Kan-Dapaah (NPP-Afigya
Sekyere West): Mr Speaker, further to
the congratulation, can I just go back to
the Bill and make some remarks.



Mr Speaker, this is one Act of
Government which will be heavily
endorsed by the business community,
especially those who were affected by it.



But Mr Speaker," on the occasion of
repealing this Bill, and for the sake of
accountability, would it not be proper for
the Committee to have told us how much
money they got from it and especially how
much money they have collected from
January to date?



Probably, again, it is in the working
documents of the Committee, but those
of us who have not had access to it, we
are not in a position to advise ourselves.
So can they tell us how much money they
collected during the period and especially
how much money has been collected after
31st December of last year? 



Thank you, Mr Speaker.

[158]

Mr Avoka: Mr Speaker, the Hon Albert
Kan-Dapaah is clearly out of order. We
are debating the principles of this Bill; it
is not Question time. So that information
may not be easily available and I think
that this is not the appropriate time to make
it Question time. 



Mr Kan-Dapaah: Mr Speaker, there
was no question in the demand that I
made. I am saying that I would be in a
better position to inform myself and
decide whether to vote for it or not. I had
no access to this very important
information. Mr Speaker, it is absolutely
important that, at least, this House knows
how much money has been collected from
31" December last year to date. This is
not a question; it is a very simple demand.



Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, we have an issue of relevance
here. We can use another tool of the
House to find out that very issue-that you
are raising. So Hon Members, you are all
ad idem.



Papa OWusu-Ankomah (NPP -
Sekondi): Mr Speaker, I thank you for
giving me the opportunity to contribute
to this debate.



Mr Speaker, there have been
occasions when even though laws have
been spent, steps have been taken to
repeal them. So it cannot be an exercise in
futility. It is in conformity with good
practices of legislation. So insofar as this
Bill seeks to repeal the National Fiscal
Stabilistion Levy (Repeal) Bill, 2011, it is
in the right direction irrespective of
whether it has been spent or not.



Mr Speaker, you will recall that the
Statute Law Review Commission
sometime ago. brought a Bill to repeal so
many enactments that, in its opinion, had
lapsed. So I believe that the House should
support this Motion, that the National
Fiscal Stabilistion Levy (Repeal) Bill -

[159]

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member for Sekondi, you would also
agree that where a Bill has a lifespan and
where that lifespan has elapsed, then you
cannot go to court and use that law even
if steps are not taken to repeal it. That is
the point. But I also agree that for the
avoidance of doubt- The point is that,
if a statute has a lifespan, then clearly,
nobody can go to court and apply that
law.



But the very important point, in my
opinion, is the clause 2 here, of the Bill,
when we have cases of accrued rights for
the clause 2. So it is under this that those
who were obliged to pay under the law
but did not pay, we can go and use clause
2 to chase them to pay. So if you do not
have clause two, then that will be the end
of the matter.



But I agree that for the avoidance of
doubt, even though we may have - but
the point is that if the statute of the
lifespan has lapsed, then we cannot go
to court really and use that law for
anything.



Papa Owusu-Ankomah: I agree with
you, Mr Speaker. But we should also for
the Appropriation Bill, any time a new
Appropriation Bill is being passed, the
previous Bill is repealed even though that
Bill has lapsed.



All I am saying is that the legal position
that we are proffering is correct -



Mr First Deputy Speaker: But not
when we pass the Appropriation Bill these
days before st December.



Papa Owusu~Ankomah: Mr Speaker,
it is the same, if you look at the last
Appropriation Act that we passed. I am
saying that the legal position that you
have articulated is perfectly correct. I
agree with you entirely. All l am saying is
that, indeed, this is in conformity with
legislative practices. That is all that I am
saying.

[160]

12.30 p.m.



Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr. Speaker,
for the Appropriation Act, yes. We, for
the avoidance of doubt, would say that
we are repealing the existing one because
we do so within the time-frame of the
operation of that Act. And we then say
that it is deemed repealed at the expiration
of the financial year. Subsequently, we
introduce another one to take effect after
that. When no Bill is to continue after that,
it becomes necessary.



Mr Speaker, would you suggest to us
that once we say per Order 77 (c),
Legislative Instrument - when does it
come into effect? Upon the expiration of
21 Sitting days?



After 21 Sitting days, then you come
with a law to begin the effectiveness of
that Instrument. Do we do that? We do
not because it is unnecessary. In the case
of Appropriations, .it is a different ball
game altogether.



So Mr Speaker, I think that we do not
need it. But gas you said, if it is for the
purpose of the avoidance of doubt that
we want to do that, fine. But some of us
think that it is superfluous. But then you
are going on another leg that any rights,
liabilities and obligations in existence
immediately before the commencement of
this Act shall continue to exist.



Mr Speaker, again, I think that that is
to be cautious. But I believe that that
could even be taken for granted once
obligations ensure under a law. If the law
is in place, you cannot say that the law is
no longer in place, so I am not going to
pay. Mr Speaker, then when Questions
are asked of Ministers, and on the spur of
the moment, the Hon Majority Leader
says, that is not Question time, so maybe,
we cannot pursue it, I disagree with him.
If a question is asked and it is relevant to

[161]

[MR KYEI-MENSAH-BONSU]



the debate, such a question could be
asked not only of Ministers but of even
the Member who is on his feet and it is to
be considered as an Urgent Question that
flows from the discussions on the floor.
Mr Speaker, once you permit same, the
question may be answered by the
Minister.



Mr Speaker, I believe that we are
covered by Orders 62 and.63 of our
Standing Orders -



Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon,
Members, I do not intend to make a ruling
on that matter but I believe that in the
course of debate, clarifications can be
sought of Hon Members. So it is more of
clarification rather than question. So
clarification can be sought, which will
inform the Hon Member to decide whether
to vote for the issue on the floor, one way
or the other.



Hon Members, I think that we have had
a fair debate on this matter and it has been
quite interesting.



Question put and Motion agreed to.



The National Fiscal Stabilisation Levy
(Repeal) Bill, 2011 was accordingly read a
Second time.



Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, I thought that this was a Bill
that would have passed all the stages but
there is no notice to that effect. We move
to item number 7.



Hon Minority Leader, why do we not
pass this Bill through all the stages and
be free? This is because there is no amendment
- it is a straightforward matter - I
thought that it was not controversial. Both
sides of the House agree that this Bill must
be repealed and I thought that we could
have passed it through all the stages.
Both sides of the House are ad idem.



Papa Owusu-Ankomah Mr Speaker,
you have to amend the Order Paper. We
did not think of it.

[162]

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Very well.



Item number 7 on the Order Paper.



BILLS -SECOND READING



Customs and Excise (Duties and Other
Taxes) (Amendment) Bill, 2011



Minister for Finance and Economic
Planning (Dr Kwabena Duffuor): Mr
Speaker, I beg to move, that the Customs
and Excise (Duties and Other Taxes)
(Amendment) Bill, 2011 be now read a
Second time.



Mr Speaker, the object of this Bill is to
reduce the Environmental Excise Tax
imposed on plastic packaging materials
from 20 per cent to 15 per cent. The
pharmaceutical and agricultural products
are exempted from the Environmental
Excise Tax, Mr Speaker. It is expected that
the reduction would decrease the input
costs for the production and packaging
of products.



Question proposed



Chairman of the Committee(Mr
James K. Avedzi): Mr Speaker, I rise to
support the Motion and in doing so, I
present your Committee’s Report.



1.0 Introduction



The Customs and Excise (Duties and
Other Taxes) (Amendment) Bill, 2011 was
presented and read the First time in the
House on Friday, 16th December, 2011 and
referred to the Finance Committee for
consideration and report in accordance
with the Constitution and Standing Orders
of the House.
The Committee subsequently met and



considered the Bill with the Minister for
Finance and Economic Planning, Hon Dr
Kwabena Duffuor, Deputy Minister for
Finance and Economic Planning, Hon Seth
Terpkeh, Commissioner-General of the

[163]

[MR AVEDZI]

Ghana Revenue Authority and officials
from the Ministry of Finance and
Economic Planning (MOFEP) and Ghana
Revenue Authority (GRA) and presents
this report to the House, pursuant to Order
161(1) of the Standing Orders of the
House. 



2.0 Purpose of the Bill



The purpose of the Bill is to reduce the
environmental excise tax imposed on
plastic packaging materials from twenty
per cent (20%) to fifteen per cent (15%).



3.0 Contents of the Bill



The Bill contains two (2) clauses.



Clause 1 seeks to amend the Fifth
Schedule of the Customs and Excise
(Duties and Other Taxes) Act, l9_96 (Act
5 12) to provide for 15 per cent rate of duty
on specified plastic packaging materials.



Clause 2 proposes to repeal Tariff No-6
of the Fifth Schedule of the Customs and
Excise (Duties and Other Taxes) Act, 1996
(Act 512) as well as TarifiNo. 6 of section
2 (a) of the Customs and Excise (Duties
and Other Taxes) Act, 2010 (Act 809).



4.0 Observations



The Committee observed that
pharmaceutical and agricultural products
are exempted from the ambit of the
environmental excise tax.



It was noted that the reduction in the
environmental excise duty on plastic
packaging materials from 20 per cent to 15
per cent will help decrease the input cost
for the production of packaged products.

[164]

5 .0 Amendments Proposed



i. Clause I -Amendment Proposed-
Second column of Table, under the
heading "Tariff Description" , line
1, before "packaging" insert
"plastic" and in paragraph (a) of that
column, delete "sachet/bottled
water" and insert "plastic packaging
for sachet and bottled water."



ii Clause 2-Amendment Proposed-
Delete and insert the following: 



"2. Repeals



The following provisions are hereby
repealed:



(a) Tariff No. 6 of the Fifth Schedule
of the Customs and Excise
(Duties and Other Taxes) Act,
1996 (Act 512), and 



(b) Tariff No. 6 of sectional (a) of the
Customs and Excise (Duties and
Other Taxes) Act, 2010 (Act

809)."



iii. Long Title -Amendment Proposed
-After "to" in line 2, delete all
words and insert "review
environmental excise tax on plastic
packaging materials and to provide
for exemptions"



6.0 Conclusion
The Committee respectfully
recommends to the House to pass the
Customs and Excise (Duties and Other
Taxes) (Amendment) Bill, 20 ll, subject to
the amendments proposed.



Respectfully submitted.



Dr A. A. Osei: Mr Speaker, I do not
have any contribution. During the
Consideration Stage, We shall discuss the
amendments.

[165]

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Very well.



Question put and Motion agreed to.



The Customs and Excise (Duties and
Other Taxes) (AmendInent)Bill, 2011
accordingly read a Second time.



MrAvoka: Mr Speaker, there is another
item under number 8 on page 4, the Internal
Revenue (Amendment) (N o. 2) Bill, 2011;
if we can kindly take that one today I
would be grateful.



Mr First Deputy Speaker: Very well.



12.40 p.m.



BILLS -SECOND READING



Internal ‘Revenue (Amendment) (No.2)
Bill, 2011



Minister for Finance and Economic
Planning (Dr Kwabena Duffuor): Mr
Speaker, I beg to move that the Internal
Revenue (Amendment) (No. 2) Bill, 2011
be now read a Second time.



Mr Speaker, the object of this Bill is to
amend the Internal Revenue Act 2000, Act
592. It would. be recalled that even though
the Ghana Stock Exchange has over the
past 20 years enjoyed tax holidays, total
capitalisation of the exchange has not met
the country's expectation. To scale up
total capitalisation of the exchange, this
Bill seeks to extend tax holiday of the
Ghana Stock Exchange for another five
years.



Additionally, the exemption from
Capital Gains Tax would also be extended
for five years with the view to promoting
investment and to augment activities of
the stock exchange. I so move, Mr
Speaker.



Question proposed.



Chairman of the Committee (Mr
James K. Avedzi): Mr Speaker, 1 beg to
support the Motion, and present your
Committees Report.

[166]

1.0 Introduction



The Internal Revenue (Amendment)
(N o. 2) Bill, 2011 was presented and read
the First time in the House on Friday, 16th
December, 2011 and referred to the
Finance Committee for consideration and
report in accordance with the
Constitution and Standing Orders of the
House.



The Committee met and considered the
Bill with the Minister for Finance and
Economic Planning, Hon Dr Kwabena
Duffuor, Deputy Minister for Finance and
Economic Planning, Hon Seth Terkpeh and
officials from the Ghana Revenue
Authority and the Ministry of Finance and
Economic Planning and hereby presents
this Report to the House, pursuant to
Order 161(1) of the Standing Orders of the
House.



2.0 Background



The Ghana Stock Exchange (GSE) has
enjoyed tax holidays for the past twenty
years. Total capitalisation of the Exchange
has, however, not met the country’s
expectation. There is therefore the need
to extend the tax holiday of the Exchange
for another five years.



Personal income tax continues to be
used as a measure for equitable
distribution of income and also for the
protection of low income earners. The
upward revision of the income tax
thresholds and brackets would help
cushion taxpayers from the impact of
inflation trends in the country by
compensating for the losses in purchasing
power of income earners.



In accordance with established practice
in the extractive industry, income tax rate
for mining companies is" being increased
from the current twenty-five per cent to
thirty-five per cent.

[167]

[MR AVEDZI]



To reduce the tax burden on the hotel
industry and to help promote tourism,
Government has decided to reduce the
corporate income tax rate for companies
principally engaged in hotel business from
22 per cent to 20 percent.



3.0 Purpose of the Bill
The purpose of the Bill is to amend the
Internal Revenue Act, 2000 (Act 592) to
review upwards the tax holiday for the
Ghana Stock Exchange, to review the tax
band for resident individuals, to increase
the income tax rate for mining companies,
to reduce the tax rate for hotel industries
and to provide for related matters.



3.1 Contents of the Bill



The Bill contains five (5) clauses
Clause l seeks to amend section 11(8)
of Act 592 by increasing the tax holiday
granted the Ghana Stock Exchange by five
(5) more years.



Clause 2 proposes to amend section
23 of Act 592 by introducing a new
subsection to prevent a person engaged
in mining operations from deducting
expenses incurred in a mining area against
revenue derived from another mining area,
in the determination of that person
chargeable income for a basis period.



Clause 3 amends section 97(3) of Act
592 by the substitution for "twenty years"
of "twenty-five years". This extends the
capital exemption from capital gains tax
for further five years.



Clause 4 amends the First Schedule to
Act 592 by reviewing upwards the income
tax bands applicable to resident
individuals. The clause further reduces
the corporate tax rate applicable to hotel

[168]

industry from 22 per cent to 20 per cent
while increasing the income tax rate
applicable to mining companies to 35 per
cent.



Clause 5 provides for the amendment
of the third Schedule of Act 5 92 to stipulate
"classes of depreciable asset" and the
rates of depreciation applicable to them.



4.0 Observations



The Committee observed that the Bill
would promote the capital market by
extending the tax holiday enjoyed by the
Ghana Stock Exchange. It would also
protect low income earners in particular
and all individuals in general from the
effect of inflation on their incomes by
adjusting the income tax brackets (bands)
upwards.



Hon Members of the Committee were
assured that with the new thresholds and
brackets, income earners whose income
remain the same Would pay lesser income
tax.



It was further noted that the corporate
tax rate of companies principally engaged
in the hotel industry would be reduced
from 22 per cent to 20 per cent upon the
passage of the Bill into an Act.



The Committee was informed that a
separate Bill on ‘windfall profit tax’ of
extractive industries is currently being
prepared and would soon be laid before
Parliament for consideration and passage.
It was noted that the brackets (bands)
for personal income tax rates are adjusted
annually to keep the rates in consonance
with inflation and the loss of value of same
amount of income. 



Members advised the Ghana Revenue
Authority to intensify public education
on the advantages offered by the Bill,
especially to individual low income
earners.

[169]

[MRAVEDZI



4.1 Amendments Proposed



The Committee respectfully proposes
the following amendments to the Bill:



i. Clause 5 - Amendment proposed -
paragraph (a), line l, delete
"Clause" and insert "paragraph".



ii. Clause 5 - Amendment proposed -
paragraph (b), delete and insert the
following:



"(b) the deletion of ‘3’ in the first
line of paragraph 3(1)".



iii. Clause 5-Amendment proposed-
paragraph (c), delete the first two
lines and insert "the substitution for
paragraph 3(2) of’.



iv. Clause 5-Amendment proposed-
Paragraph (d), delete and insert the
following:



"(d) the deletion of paragraph
3 (3 )(b)".



v. Clause 5 - Amendment proposed-
paragraph (e), delete and insert the
following:



"(e) the substitution for the heading
of paragraph 4 of Class 3, 5 and 6
depreciable assets".



vi. Clause 5 - Amendment proposed
- paragraph (f), delete and insert
the following:



"(f) the insertion after paragraph 4(1)
of new sub-paragraphs (lA) and

(1B)



"(1A). A person shall be
granted for each year of
assessment . a capital
allowance for each Class 3
depreciable asset with respect
to a basis period ending within
the year calculated using the
formula:

[170]

AxBxC/365 



Where,



A is the cost base of the asset



B is the rate of 20 per cent



C is the number of days in the
basis period.



(1B). The written down value
of the pool. of Class 3
depreciable assets of a
person in the year of
assessment immediately
preceding the year of
assessment in which this Act
comes into effect shall, for the
purpose of subparagraph 1A
of this paragraph, be regarded
as the cost base of a Class 3
depreciable asset acquired in
the year of assessment in
. which this Act commences."



vii. Clause 5 - Amendment proposed
- paragraph (g), delete and insert
the following: 



"(g) the insertion in paragraph
4(3) of "3" before "S"; and".



viii. Clause 5 -Amendment proposed
- paragraph (h), delete and insert
the following:



"(h) the insertion in paragraph
' 4(4) of "3" before "5".



ix. Amendment proposed ~-Add a new
clause 6 to the Bill as follows:



"Revocation 0fL.I. 1996



6.The Internal Revenue
(Amendment) Regulations,
2011 (L.I. 1996) is hereby
revoked."



x. Long Title- Amendment proposed
- Delete and insert the following:

[171]

[MR AVEDZI]



"An Act to amend the Internal
Revenue Act, 2000 (Act 592) to
review upwards the tax holiday for
the Ghana Stock Exchange, to
review the tax band for resident
individuals, to increase the income
tax rate for mining companies, to
reduce the tax rate for hotel
industries and to provide for related
matters."



Short Title-Amendment proposed
-After "(AMENDMENT)" insert
"(Na 2)".



5.0 Conclusion



The Committee respectfully
recommends to the House to pass the
Internal Revenue (Amendment) Bill, 2011.



Respectfully submitted. 



Ranking Member of the Committee
(Dr Anthony A. Osei): Mr Speaker,
anytime measures are taken to reduce the
cost of doing business to Ghanaians, we
should all support it. 



These amendments seek to do two
things. In some cases, they seek to
reduce taxes, in a major case, they seek to
increase taxes. We will discuss the merits
of both sides when we come to the
Consideration Stage. 



But Mr Speaker, I would want to urge
the Minister.- I believe that some time
ago, last year when we approved for him
to raise the income tax bar, somehow, the
Ghana Revenue Authority (GRA) failed to
bring the Bill for us to amend it. So
individuals could not take advantage of
it. Now that we are doing it, I hope that
the people can take advantage of it.



In particular, the education on that
matter ought to be wide enough for people

[172]

to know, so that people can begin to take
advantage of what is being proposed.



Mr Speaker, the hospitality industry, I
believe, when we looked at the budget,
showed some decline. One cannot
conclude that it was as a result of
excessive taxation. However, one can be
sure that if taxes are reduced, that decline
could be reversed. So l think we should
all support it for that purpose.



But it is difficult to explain exactly why
there was the decline last year. This is
because if you looked at the number of
flights that were coming in, it should not
have gone down.



So I am hopeful that this move would
bring them back-up because it could
potentially become the largest foreign
exchange earner if we nurture it properly.



Mr Speaker, as-I have said, on the
matter of the extractive industry increase,
when we come to the amendments, we
would be able to adduce reasons for or
against that. So I reserve my arguments
there. Otherwise, I urge all Hon Members‘
to adopt the Report of the Committee, so
that we can move to the Consideration
Stage.



Mr Isaac Osei (NPP-Subin): Thank
you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity to
say a few words on this Bill.



Mr Speaker, I share the sentiments
expressed by the Hon Ranking Member
on Finance. 



I also would like to say that I am very
pleased that, with respect to the
hospitality industry, we are in the process
of reducing the tax payable from 22 per
cent to 20 per cent. But I think the problem
of the hospitality industry may_ well have
something to do with the repeal of L.l.
18 17, which offers them a whole range of
facilities- These, I understand, are being
taken up by the GRA. But that really is

[173]

[MR I. OSEI]



the crux' of the matter; that we should look
again at the repeal of L.I. 1817 and see
how we can bring back the benefits which
those in the hospitality industries were
enjoying before.



Having said that the income tax rise
for the mining companies to 35 per cent, I
believe, is in the right direction- ‘I would
have suggested that when we were talking
about environmental tax, perhaps, we
should have looked at the mining
companies and impose an environmental
tax considering the pollution of a lot of
water bodies by some of these mining
companies.



I will also support when it comes to
the floor of the House, the idea of a
windfall profit tax on extractive industries.
I think p.art of that tax may well be used
for cleaning some of our - But as Hon
Dr Akoto Osei said, the fact that those in
the lower income brackets are going to
pay reduced taxes, is something which
all of us should support. 



With these few words, I believe that
the House should adopt the Report of the
Committee.



Dr Matthew O. Prempeh (NPP -
Manhyia): Mr Speaker, historical
evidence shows that nobody wants to pay
tax. Nobody, ‘corporate or individual is
enamoured of paying tax. But taxes have
been tools by all governments to help
develop economies - [Interruption]



Dr A. A. Osei: Mr Speaker, I beg to
differ. Mr Speaker, we are Hon Members
of Parliament; we want to be taxed. So to
say that nobody wants to be taxed, he
should speak for himself. I would want to
be taxed.



Mr First Deputy Speaker: I think the
point that he wants to make is that, many
people are not comfortable with paying
taxes.

[174]

Dr Prempeh: Mr Speaker, this is a
very unnecessary intervention. If people
listen, they would understand what I am
saying. I said historically, no individual
or company is enamoured in paying taxes.
Everybody wants to reduce his tax -
[Interruption]



Mr Avoka: Mr Speaker, with the
greatest respect to our very good Friend
from Manhyia, we should not use this
forum to make general and sweeping
statements. If you Say that some people
or some corporate institutions loathe
paying taxes, we can understand. But he
said "nobody historically". What is his
basis? What is his basis for saying that
historically, nobody wants to pay taxes.
It is not fair. He cannot use this forum to
say that. Mr Speaker, he should stop that.



Mr Opare-Ansah: MI Speaker, the
Hon Member for Manhyia is right and
wrong.



Mr Speaker, when I pay taxes and I can
see my taxes are being used for
development, then I am happy and I am
eager to pay more. But when I pay taxes,
Mr Speaker, and I see those taxes being in
gargantuan fashion given to one person,
then I do not want to pay taxes. [Laughter]



Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, you are completely out of order.



Papa Owusu-Ankomah: Mr Speaker,
I think the Hon Member for"Old Tafo, I am
sure, may be able to tell us that at one
time when he was assessed to pay tax, he
voluntarily wrote to the authorities to say
that the tax that he had been assessed to
pay was too low and so, he would pay
double. That iswhat he wants to tell us -
[Laughter]



12.50 pm.



Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member for Manhyia, continue.

[175]

Dr Prempeh: I was even going to cite
cases that have gone to the Supreme
Court of the United States to buttress my
point. 



But governments need taxes to
develop economies and countries. That
is why taxes are not voluntary. If taxes
were voluntary, we would have seen who
will run to the IRS to pay tax. That is why
we have to put it in the legal regime.



Mr Speaker, I support wholeheartedly
the reduction in the hospitality industry
taxes. We have seen clear evidence from
the Committee on Trade and Industry, the
effect of that tax removal - L.l. 18 17-
had on the hospitality industry. Mr
Speaker, that is why it must be a deliberate
conscious effort to separate the wheat
from the chaff when it comes to taxes. Mr
Speaker, I cannot support wholeheartedly
when we say Ghana Stock Exchange
should be exempted from five years’ tax.



Mr Speaker, the track record of the
Ghana Stock Exchange has seen people
making enormous profits. So, we must be
careful to calibrate what we mean by these
things. When the current Government
came into power, because of certain
statements, there was a capital flight and
we came into this House to say that we
should not scare investors. When you go
into the Ghana Stock Exchange, it is these
same investors who are the majority
players of the Ghana Stock Exchange and
here we are again granting them extension
of tax holidays.



So, Mr Speaker, we have to be very
careful. I would have accepted or
wholeheartedly supported the Ministry of
Finance and Economic Planning if they
had computed the taxes we are getting
from Ghana Stock Exchange vis-a-vis,
these five years, the amount of money
Ghana is losing. That would have been a
deliberate policy.

[176]

Mr Speaker, we were in this country
when through the effect of the Bretton-
Wood institutions, taxes were removed
from mining companies, even bringing in
capital investments, assets and things like
that. It has not augured well for the
economy of the country. Look at the
enormous profit. Now, we are thinking of
doing windfall taxes. Our fellow
colleagues in some southern African
countries did not go through that way.



So, Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Finance
and Economic Planning should use its
leverage on taxation to cause specific
policy shifts. Why can we come here and
discuss windfall taxes, then the whole
mining industry stands up and starts
fighting the poor Ghana Government,
whereas we still make sure that the capitals
that they are bringing are tax-exempt at
our ports? So, we must be deliberate. I
believe that the windfall tax in the mining
industry, even if it is brought and we
support it, it should lead to a fundamental
change in our taxation as to our ports and
harbours when they are bringing in
equipment.



Mr Speaker, this is the Work the
Ministry of Finance and Economic
Planning should be doing for us, not just
coming to say Ghana Stock Exchange
when we know the players are big players.
How many poor people go on the Ghana
Stock Exchange anyway? How many poor
people? So, Mr Speaker, I am yet to be
convinced that we should wholeheartedly
support it even though the Committee is
supporting it.



Mr Speaker, the hospitality industry
was protected by the Free-Zone Board
when they applied. This is because they
service the tourism industry. What has
happened to those taxes and the reliefs
that they were being given then? It is not
just good enough to come and say 20 per
cent to 15 per cent. We must see a
deliberate policy to help some of these
industries grow.

[177]

[DR PREMPBH] 



Mr Speaker, I am totally in support of
the environmental tax but we should be
deliberate on it. Mr Speaker, the pollution
going on in our forests by water bodies,
forest degradation, we have not even
started computing that in quantum of
economic losses to the country. We have
not computed that.



So, Mr Speaker, I would entreat the Hon
Minister for Finance and Economic
Planning, and he will be doing posterity
good service, if he used his leverage on
taxation for a deliberate policy, so that
Ghana gets enough benefits out of the
industries operating in Ghana here.



Mr Speaker, in those short words, I
would accept what our Finance Committee
has brought before us_ But I would
caution that the Hon Minister for Finance
and Economic Planning should do this
House more good, so that We can support
policies to bring in more tax revenue.



Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, that brings us to the end of the
debate. 



Hon Minister, do you intend winding
up?



Dr Duffuor Mr Speaker, I would like
to thank this Honourable House for the
advice given me this morning. We would
take note and make sure that we put in
place measures which should grow the
revenue. 



Question put and Motion agreed to.



The internal Revenue _(A1I1e11dm€:nt)
(No. 2) Bill, 2011 accordingly read a Second
time. 



Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Majority Leader?



Mr Opare-Ansah: Mr Speaker, just to
draw attention to the earlier debate we had
on the repeal of the National Fiscal
Stabilisation Levy Bill, 2011.

[178]

Mr Speaker, when you look at it, the
Bill is seeking to repeal the National Fiscal
Stabilisation Levy Act, 2009 (Act 785).
The Hon Ranking Member alluded to the
fact that there was an amendment Act to
extend the life -



Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, you know you are out of order.
We have put a Question on that issue.
This is because you are in Leadership, you
should know your bounds.



Mr Opare-Ansah: Mr Speaker, I am
just making a suggestion that as we are
going back and possibly come and do the
Consideration Stage, we find space to
address this concern. The point is that I
would want to know what the effect will
be to successfully repeal this, if it happens
that that extension of time came by an
amendment Act.



Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, we will be moving to the
Consideration Stage and therefore, if you
feel strongly about that point, you can
file an amendment for the House to look
at. If you feel strongly about the issue
with regard to the clause l that deals with-



Mr Opare-Ansah: Mr Speaker, that is
not what I am saying. This is a new matter.
I am saying that the original Act was
amended to get an extension of time. That
is what the Hon Ranking Member said-
And I am drawing our attention to the fact
that, if that extension of time was granted
by an amendment Act - This is because
he was not very sure what the situation
was regarding that extension of time.



But I am advising the leadership of the
Committee to take a critical look at that
fact because if you end up repealing this
Act and there is an aInendmentAct, which
gives the same effect, then I really do not
know what we have done.

[179]

Dr A. A. Osei: Mr Speaker, my Hon
Chief Whip is on the Committee. So, when
he talks about the leadership, he is part of
the leadership of the Committee.



What I said was that this House took a
decision whether it was through an
amendment, I do not know. I did not say
for sure that it was through an
amendment. But he is on the Committee,
so he should also be telling us what
decision we took. He is part of our
leadership. 



Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, that point has been raised
during the Second Reading. You are only
advising us to go and look at the law and
Whatever decision we took as a House to
guide us at the Consideration Stage to
ensure that we do the proper thing. So,
we leave it there for now. Let us all go and
look at that law, that amendment law, and
then when we come to the Consideration
Stage, we make sure that we do not commit
any blunder.



Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu Mr Speaker,
I think the issue that the Hon Chief Whip
is bringing up, is that we should go back
in the amendments that we effected to the
original; if it came by an-amendment Act -
- and I believe that is how we will do it.



Now, this amendment relates to the Act
785 of 2009. And he is suggesting to us
that because we came by another
amendment Act to the original, the repeal
now should concern the amendment Act
and not the original. That is the issue that
he is bringing up; in which case, this
whole exercise will be an exercise in futility.



Mr First Deputy Speaker: That is why
I am saying that we should all go back
and look at the laws on this matter and
their amendments, which will then guide
us when we come to the Consideration
Stage. It is a very important point.

[180]

1.00 p.m.



Mr Cletus A. Avoka: Mr Speaker, I
thank him for his information. We would
check up and find out the true legal
position and then do so accordingly.



Mr Speaker, we have virtually
completed the matters on the Order Paper
for today, except item l1llI1'1b€I' 9 at page 4
and that is the Consideration Stage of the
Presidential Transition Bill, 2010. Mr
Speaker, we intended to have a winnowing
with regard to this all-important Bill, but
following the developments by way of the
reshuffle, it has not been possible for us
to do it.



So, yesterday, the Hon Minority Leader
and I and the Committee Chairman and a
few other Hon Members met with Justice
V. C. R. A. C- Crabbe to undertake the
winnowing, but we wanted the complement
of the Attorney-General’s Department;
either the Hon Minister himself or his
Deputy. But as I have indicated, it has
not been possible to programme the Hon
Minister or his Deputy.



So I am looking forward to contacting
the Minister personally, so that we can
arrange a winnowing for next week
Tuesday -- we agreed, after which we
can take this Bill. So tomorrow, we can
look at the Consideration Stage of the Bills
of which we have done the Second
Reading this afternoon and then we can
complete those three Bills tomorrow and
the other matters and then next week, we
would advise ourselves on the Business
Statement.



Mr Speaker, having said that, I beg to
humbly move, that We adjourn the House
till tomorrow at 10.00 o’clock in the
forenoon.



Mr Osei Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr
Speaker, undoubtedly, the tumultuous
events that are unfolding, which are

[181]

[MRIKYEI-MENSAH-BONSU]



culminating in the Cabinet reshuffle, really
are causing considerable turbulence
within governmental circles. So I agree
with him that we need to see some
stabilisation. I do not think that it is going
to be at the expense of Stabilisation Levy,
the repeal of it. I do not think so. But we
must take time and allow for some
stabilisation to affect governance before
we proceed further. Otherwise,»Mr
Speaker, nobody knows What we would
be heading towards.



I agree entirely with the Majority
Leader for that admission. I guess by next
week -

[182]

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Minority Leader, are you seconding the
adjournment Motion or - [Laughter.]



Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
I am concurring the observation first and
then I would move to second the Motion.
So Mr Speaker, I think on that note, I beg
to second the Motion.



Question put and Motion agreed to.



ADJOURNMENT



The House was accordingly
adjourned at 1.03 p.m. till Friday, 27th
January, 2012 at 10.00 a.m.