FOURTH SERIES VOL. 77 No. 1
15 MAY, 2012


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES
OFFICIAL REPORT
TUESDAY, 15TH MAY, 2012

CONTENTS

WELCOME ADDRESS -- [C0L. 1]

ANNOUNCEMENTS --

Communication from the President -- [Cols. 3 , 4]

VOTES AND PROCEEDINGS AND THE OFFICIAL REPORT -- [Col. 6]

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS -
Ministry of Environment, Science and Technology - [C0L. 22]

CONSIDERATION STAGE OF BILLS -
Public HealthBill, 2011 - [Col. 9, 55]

ADJOURNMENT-- [Col. 66]

Correction of errors of substance may be made only on the floor of the House with the permission of Mr.
Speaker. However, correction of typographical or grammatical errors which Members suggest for the
Bound Volumes which will be compiled at the end of the Meeting may be clearly marked in the Daily
Report, and the copy containing the corrections must be received at the Editor's Office, Parliament
House, not later than four clear days after the publication of the Daily Report.

BOUND VOLUMES of Debates (with comprehensive Index) are issued periodically during the Session. There is no fixed subscription rate, but prices will be quoted and standing orders entered on
application.

Printed by Department of Official Report
Parliament House, Accra


THE 
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES

OFFICIAL REPORT

IN THE SECOND MEETING OF THE FOURTH SESSION OF THE
FIFTH PARLIAMENT OF THE FOURTH REPUBLIC OF GHANA
WPIICH OPENED ON 24TH JANUARY 2012 IN THE 
TWENTIETH YEAR OF THE FOURTH REPUBLIC

FOURTH SERIES SECOND VOLUME OF SESSION VOLUME 77

THE
PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC
OF GHANA

SECOND MEETING; 2012

Tuesday, 15 May, 2012

The House met at 10.10 am.

[1]

[MADAM SPEAKER IN THE CHAIR]

PRAYERS

WELCOME ADDRESS

Madam Speaker: Honourable Members,
1 welcome you all to the Second Meeting
of the Fourth Session of the Fifth
Parliament of the Fourth Republic. I thank
the Almighty God for seeing to your well-
being while you were away and bringing
you all safely back to the House this
morning.

It is my prayer that He will continue to
endow us with wisdom and a keen. sense of
duty during the course of this Meeting,
to enable us continue our work here
satisfactorily as in all previous meetings.

Honourable Members, 1 am aware you
did not have the opportunity to rest and
invigorate yourselves as you would have
wished from the pressures of the work,
as a result of the recent biometric
registration exercise which thankfully
has ended successfully.

Also, I know that, Honourable
Members have also been busy with other
constituency engagements. But as
exhausting as your Work has been, l wish to
state that this is all about the call to
national service as Hon Members of
Parliament and sacrifices associated
with it.

Hon Members, I take this opportunity
to warmly congratulate you for the good
work done.

The present Meeting will be hectic as we
have a lot of business to conduct. I trust
Honourable Members will, as usual,
continue to give the Chair and
Leadership, the needed cooperation and
improve upon their attendance to the House
to enable us complete our business on time.

Honourable Members, once again, I
welcome you back to the House and
wish you an enjoyable and fruitful
working Meeting.

Thank you. [Hear! Hear!]

[3]                            

ANNOUNCEMENTS

Communication from the President

Madam Speaker: Hon Members, I
have received communication from His
Excellency the President and I would like
to read this to you. The first one is dated
the 12th of April, 2012:

RT. HON. SPEAKER, A
OFFICE OF PARLIAMENT,
STATE HOUSE,
OSU-ACCRA.

Right Honourable Speaker,

 I wish to inform you that I have
nominated for consideration by
Parliament the following Deputy Ministers
~Designate:

Mr Anthony Gyambiby -
Deputy Attorney-General and Deputy
Minister Designate for Justice.

Mr Kwadwo Owusu-Agyeman --
Deputy Minister Designate for the
Ministry of Lands and Natural Resources.

Let me take this opportunity, Honourable
Speaker, to assure you of my highest esteem.

(Sgd.)PROF. JOHN EVANS ATTA MILLS
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC
OF GHANA. 

I refer this to the Appointments
Committee.

The other communication is dated 14th
of May, 2012, which reads:

[4]

14 May, 2012

THE RT. HON. SPEAKER
OFFICE OF PARLIAMENT
PARLIAMENT HOUSE
ACCRA

Right Hon. Speaker,

Absence from Ghana

In accordance with article 59 of the
Constitution of the Republic of Ghana, 1
Write to inform you that, I shall be away in
the United States of America from
Wednesday, 16th of May to Monday, 21st of
May, 2012 at the invitation ofHis Excellency
Barack Obama, President of the United
States of America to attend the 2012 G-8
Summit.

During my absence from Ghana, the
Vice President, H. E. John Dramani
Mahama, shall, in accordance with article
60(8) of the Constitution, act in my stead.

Kindly accept, Right Honourable, the
assurances of my highest consideration.

(Sgd.) PROP. JOHN EVANS ATTA MILLS
PRESIDENT or THE REPUBLIC
OF GHANA

Cc: H. E. THE VICE PRESIDENT."

Mr Osei Kyei Mensah-Bonsu -rose

Madam Speaker: Yes, Hon Minority
Leader? 


[5]                                 

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Madam
Speaker, thank you for welcoming us back.

I think on this occasion, we have begun
on a very good note, beginning at 10
o'clock and I hope that it continues. But
a little observation, since we have begun
on a very good note.

Madam Speaker, after the prayers, you
gave us a message. The order of business
in this House is captured in Order 53. Of
course, I do know that as the Speaker, by
your leave, the order of Business set out
in the Order Paper may be altered on any
particular day that is Order 53 (2).

But since there was no such indication,
Madam Speaker, after the prayers, I
thought the Message from the President
ought to have come to us first, since there
was no indication that the business set
out in the Order Paper was to be amended,
yet you gave us some communication. I
do not know whether it is formal
communication by the Speaker or
ceremonial speech.

But that as it may, Madam Speaker, that
ought to have come after the Message
from the President. I was Wondering, but
I would not litigate it. I thought that what
is worth doing is worth doing well.

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

Madam Speaker: I thank you, Hon
Minority Leader. I had considered that
and Order 53 (2), but I thought it would be
taken for granted. But if I varied things
here, it is because I have the power on
that, under Order 53 (2), to do so. [Hear!
Hear!] So you are completely right, but I
did use my powers on that, under order
53 (2).

Mr Cletus Apul Avoka: Madam
Speaker, I appreciate his intervention but
I also think that it is only fair for you to
welcome us back from recess before any
other business or discussions can be

[6]

done. So even thought the Standing
Orders provide, as he has indicated, I think
that you are perfectly right in trying to
welcome us back to the House before you
go ahead to do or announce other
businesses in the House. I think that they
complement each other.

Thank you.

10.20 am.

Madam Speaker: I thank the Hon
Majority Leader. I was think in the same
Way, that, should I just start with business
without welcoming you, it would be
contrary to Ghanaian hospitality. I have
to Welcome you and then move on to
business. But yes, I used my powers,
like I said, under Standing Order 53 (2) to
vary the Order. But I thank you; We intend
to keep the rules.

Mr Kyei Mensah-Bonsu: Madam
Speaker, I agree with you when you said
that you invoked some residual powers. I
will agree with you. But it is not for nothing
that we have the order of business set
out in the Order Paper for us. So What the
Majority Leader is saying, that path is
very slippery for him, he should not go
there. But I agree with you. You have
some inherent residual powers. You have
invoked it. I will respect same.

Thank you.

Madam Speaker: I thank the Hon
Leaders. I think the Leaders intended to
put us all on our toes this Meeting.

Thank you once again.

Votes and Proceedings and the
Official Report

Madam Speaker: Hon Members,
Correction of Votes and Proceedings of
Thursday, 22 of March, 2012.

Any corrections on page 1?

Page 2 ... 6 --

Mr Kyei Mensah-Bonsu: Madam
Speaker, on page 6, I do not really
recollect what we did the day before
Thursday, that is the Wednesday Sitting.

[7]                                        

[MR KYEI-MENSAH-BONSU] 

But I noticed that we have, by item
numbered 5, adopted the Votes and
Proceedings for the Thirty~Sixth Sitting.
Then item numbered 6, captures the
adoption of the Votes and Proceedings
for the Thirty~Third and Thirty-Fourth
Sittings. 

It appears the Thirty-Fifth Sitting the
Votes and Proceedings is lost out. I do
not know whether we approved of same
on Wednesday, if my memory could be
refreshed. If we did, then that is all right.
If we did not, then it appears we are lost
out on that. "

Madam Speaker: Clerk, can you help
us? Was the minutes of the Thirty-Fifth
Sitting adopted? [Pause]

Hon Minority Leader, I see the point
you are making because item 6 talks about
Thirty-Third, Thirty-Fourth, no Thirty-
Fifth but Thirty~Sixth Sitting was talked
about in item 5 so we would investigate
and find out. We cannot tell you
straightaway but it will be investigated
and if it has not been approved, then we
will bring it to the House.

Thank you.

Any more corrections on page 6?

Page 7 37 --[Pause.]

Hon Members, the Votes and
Proceedings of Thursday the 22 March,
2012 as corrected, is adopted as the true
record of proceedings.

We do not have issues of the Official
Report today, so let us move to item 3
then - Questions.

Hon Leader, we have Questions for the
Hon Minister for Environment, Science
and Technology.

10.30 am.

Mr Cletus A. Avoka: Madam Speaker,
I regret to say that the Hon Minister for
Environment, Science and Technology
has not yet come to the House. With your

 [8]

kind permission, I will pray that we take
item 5 on page 2 of the Order Paper. We
are happy to indicate that the Chairman
of the Committee and the Deputy Minister
of State who have been assisting us to
pilot the Public Health Bill are both in the
House. So, with your kind permission,
we will start with deliberations, the
consideration of the Public Health Bill,
2011 at page 2, Item 5.

Thank you.

Madam Speaker: Were you going to
go back on the Questions today?

Mr Avoka: Madam Speaker, we would
defer the Question time for the mean time.

Madam Speaker: Hon Members, Item
5 will be taken by the Mr First Deputy
Speaker.

10.34 a.m- 

[MR FIRST DEPUTY SPEAKER IN THE
CHAIR]

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Majority Leader ---

Mr Avoka: Mr Speaker, we will do item
5 at page 2. That is the consideration of
the Public Health Bill, 2011.

With your kind permission, the Hon
Deputy Minister for Health, Hon Rojo
Mettle Nunoo is here and he will assist us
to deliberate on this Bill. The Chairman of
the Committee and other Members are
also available. So, even though today is
the first day, we want to hit the ground
running and to give an indication to
everybody that we mean business.

This is a short Meeting that we have
but with a very tall order of business to
do, so it is a challenge to all of us. Even
though today is our first day, we are
starting with the Bill.

Thank you. 

[9]                                     

Mr Kyei Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
this phraseology "hitting the ground
running" has been used and we know that
people who are purported to have done
that have hit the ground and suffered
broken limbs. [Laughter] So, for the Hon
Majority Leader to be invoking this
phraseology, I believe he is in a dream
world- Notwithstanding, we will see what
to do.

BILLS -- CONSIDERATION STAGE

 Public Health Bill, 2011

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, the Public Health Bill, 2011 at
the Consideration Stage. 

Hon Chairman of the Committee, can
you refresh the Chair’s memory? Have
We started or we are starting afresh?
Chairman of the Committee (Alhaji
Mohammed-Mubarak Muntaka): Mr
Speaker, we are starting all afresh.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Very
well. Thank you, very much.

Clause 1 --Application of this part to
other diseases. 

Clause 2 -Declaration of infected area
order for evacuation. --

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: -- rose--

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member for Ketu North? Very well.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
you asked the Chair to refresh the minds
of Hon Members including in particular,
the Chair, about the grounds that We had
covered before we left, and he says to us
that we are going to start all over. Mr
(Speaker, I am just perusing this document
and the-first provision, part one:

[10]

"Application of this part to other
diseases".

Mr Speaker, We are talking about the
Public HealthBill, 2011, and we are talking
about communicable diseases for part
one. It is as though we have not even
dealt With, by saying "Application of this
part to other diseases". I am not too sure
what we mean by that. And then the first
provision is:

"1. (1) The Minister shall, by
executive instrument, declare that
the disease is communicable,
infectious or contagious in nature."

I am not too sure of any law that we
have crafted which we have begun in this
manner, I am not too sure of it.

So, I am a bit in a wonderland But first
of all, the sub-caption Application of this
part to other diseases, let us get it
straightened and then maybe, we can
move on.

Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, if I
understand the Hon Minority Leader, very
well, this Bill, unlike many of the Bills that
We have dealt With, is not specifically
under a particular agency. In our effort to
put all the health laws together, in order
not to leave them separated, there have
been a lot of consultations to consolidate
them.

You would realize that this particular
Public Health Bill, 2011 has about nine
parts. You have a part that talks about
tobacco control, which in actual sense is
managed by the Directorate of Public
Health at the Ghana Health Service, and
the Ghana Health Service has its
structure.

So the usual tendency of having a
Board or an Agency, all those
descriptions will not fit in this particular
instance. Most of the parts are being
handled by the Food and Drugs Board,
and majority of the arts are handled by
the Directorate of Public Health under the
Ghana Health Service. That is why this
Bill did not start with the usual structure
that we have.

[11]                                           

[ALHAJI MUNTAKA]

But as the Hon Minority Leader may
be aware of, the Public Health Directorate
deals with more issues, sometimes even
beyond health, and because of that it is
not possible to begin talking about their
detailed structure in this particular law,
because other laws have established them
and they are being managed by those
laws. This one is supposed to strengthen
their hands in their ability to carry out
their duties and perform effectively to
protect the public interest, that is why this
Bill is drafted in this form.

At the meeting, this issue came up and
the drafters at the Attorney~General’s
Office; said "no; this is another form of
putting together a Bill" and that is Why
we are here with the format you are seeing.
I do not know if I have satisfactorily
answered your question.

 10.40 am.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Minority Leader, are you satisfied with his
explanation?

Mr Kyei Mensah-Bonsu: MrSpeaker,
somewhat; not entirely. But for purposes
of moving forward, maybe, we will see, as
we move on, if there is anything to be
done to restructure it in a better Way, we
could make proposals.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Very well.

Clauses l and 2 ordered to stand part
of the Bill.

Clause 3 -- Stopping of vehicles.

Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, I beg to
move, clause 3, sub-clause (2), delete and
substitute the following:

"The Minister may by Regulations
provide for the removal of:

[12]

(a) A person suffering or suspected to
be suffering from a communicable
disease from a vehicle; or

(b) A corpse or article suspected to be
capable of spreading infection from
a vehicle"

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Chairman, you should tell us the essence
of the amendment

Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, if you
read the current rendition, it just said that
it is going to be done by Regulation, and
in the discussion at the Committee level,
it was felt that the way it was couched in
the current rendition looked clumsy, if so,
why do we not break it up and also re-
emphasize, knowing very well that
regulations could only be made through
the Hon Minister? So that was just what
We seek to do.

But if you look at the current rendition
and what we propose to do, the current
amendment is proposing or suggesting
that we break the sentence into two, to
give it some clarity, instead of the Way it
is couched in the Bill which makes it look
clumsy.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Chairman of the Committee, if you look at
your new rendition, it is taking out the
clause 3 (1) (b) - Or has it captured
everything here? 

Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, if you
look at the clause 3 (1) (b), it is different
from clause 3 (2) because the clause 3 (2)
is talking about the person suffering and
then corpse, but if you look at clause 3 (1)
(b), it talks about detaining any of the
persons travelling or being conveyed in
or on the vehicle. So it is not necessary
that somebody should be suffering from
- so that is the difference.  


[13]                                     

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Very well.

But you know that what we have here,
even if this law passes, you have to bring
the Regulations before it can come into
effect. But in this form, while the Hon
Minister would bring the Regulation, if
you passed the law now, these people can
start doing something before even the
Regulation comes in to regulate it. That is
the difference. Do you get the point I am
making? 

With this one, when the law is passed
before the introduction of the Regulation,
when there is an issue of communicable
disease, they can use clause 3 (1) to take
action. But with the current rendition that
you are proposing to the House, what it
means is that, until you bring the
Regulation, this category of people
cannot take action. That is the difference
between your amendment and what is in
the Bill. ls that what you want?

Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, if you
look at what is currently in the Bill, it is so.
If you look especially at the last sentence,
and with your permission, I read:

"A person suffering or suspected
to be suffering from a communicable
disease, or a corpse or an article
suspected to be capable of
spreading infection may be
removed from the vehicle and dealt
with as prescribed by Regulations."

Mr First Deputy Speaker: It is the
dealing that is supposed to be prescribed
by Regulations. But if you look at clause
3 (1), (a) and (b), there is no mention of
Regulations; it is clause 3 (2) that talks
about how to deal With that person, that
is going to be prescribed by Regulations,
and that is the difference between the two.

Alhaji Muntaka: Rightly so, Mr
Speaker, if you look at clause 3 (1), it is
more or less standing alone, even though
it is part of the whole issue of --
[Interruption]

[14]

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Yes, it
stands alone, that is the point I am making.
But you are merging the two to be
covered by Regulations. I am saying that,
what it means is that, when we pass the
law now and until we pass through, all
the Motions and introduced Regulations,
until we bring in Regulation, if there is
 "communicable disease"  somewhere, the
law would be redundant in dealing with it.

I am only-telling you because, these
are not normal times that is why I am
drawing the Committees attention to it.
These are not normal times, and for you
to get your Regulations before you come
and introduce this, I am telling you that
this law would not take effect until maybe
some other time in the future.

Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, What we
seek to do is to only replace the sub-clause
(2), but the sub-clause (1) is still part and it
is not tampered with.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Very well.

That is a good explanation. Hon Members,
I will put the Question?

Mr Osei Kyei Mensah-Bonsu -
rose -

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Minority Leader, What is your problem?

Mr Kyei Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
I did own up and said that I have not really
had a good look at this Bill. I notice that
the short title provides as follows:

"An ACT to revise and consolidate
the law relating to public health to
prevent diseases, promote,
safeguard, maintain and protect the
health of humans and animals and
to provide for related matters."

- Mr Speaker, the little that I have seen
from, where we have gotten to, we seem
to be concentrating on human beings but
we are talking about humans and animals.

[15]                                         

[MR KYEI-MENSAH-BONSU]

So I thought that for a start, if we spoke
about corpse, we would be talking about
carcass as well and as you said any other
things. But we seem to be concentrating
on that one in respect of clauses 1, 2 and
even where we are now, 3.

I was just perusing it to see whether
there are specific places designated for
the treatment of animals. I do not see it
expressly and so I am wondering why we
are choosing this path, if I could have
some explanation.

10.50 am.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Minority Leader, the explanation he gave
earlier was that, these are more or less a
consolidation of different legislations, one
dealing with tobacco, another dealing with
animals and another with human beings,
communicable diseases and all those
things. As to whether this is the part that
deals with - Very well. But if you have
scanned through the whole Bill and there
is no mention of animals, then you have a
case, so the Hon Chairman must respond
to that issue.

Hon Chairman, which part of this Bill
deals with animals?

Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, you are
perfectly right. When you talk about the
other parts, you will see that we have a
situation where we talk, for example Part
IV, about vector control. You talk about
Part III that talks about quarantining.

I know he is talking about the animal,
yes, and I am saying that when you look
at Part III, it talks about quarantine, you
look at Part IV, it talks about vector control,
and Part V talks about environmental
sanitation. So it is within these parts that
you find -- And I would want to agree
with the Hon Minority Leader, that, it is
not only human beings that could spread

[16]

infections, other animals could, and I want
to say that we need to look at the
interpretation of the other articles, whether
that would not cover the animals.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
what the Hon Chairman has said -

Mr First Deputy Speaker: What did
he say? Sorry, the Clerk -
[Interruption]

Mr Kyei Mensah-Bonsu: Can he
repeat himself?

Mr First Deputy Speaker: The Clerk
to Parliament was talking to me; sorry.
What did you say? Which clause deals
with animals? That is the issue.

Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, I am
saying that when you look at Part III, it
talks about quarantine and the quarantine
there is not only referring to human beings
being quarantined. For example, Part II
talks about vaccination and it is not only
talking about human vaccination.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Please, you
have mentioned animals specifically; do
you understand? And that is a very valid
point that the Hon Minority Leader is
raising. If you look at the Long Title of
the Bill, it talks about humans and animals,
and if you even look at what you talked
about --. stopping of vehicles -- the one
that we are doing now, if a vehicle
potentially -~- can communicate
communicable disease, what happens?

You see? That is the point that the Hon
Minority Leader is raising.

Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, if the
Hon Minority Leader could be patient. I
agree like he said, he has not read through,
but if you look at even where we are now,
and you look at clause 9, it talks
specifically about destruction of animals;
if you look at clause 9, yes. It is both
human and animals as we go along, unless
otherwise he thinks that there is some
amendment that needs to be done to
further enrich it.

[17]                                              

Mr First Deputy Speaker: The point
the Hon Minority Leader is making is this,
let me just give you an example. Look at
clause 3 (1) (b),

"detain any of the persons travelling
or being conveyed in or on a
vehicle."

So if there is an animal that has that
communicable disease, you cannot detain
it because here they have limited it to
persons. That is the argument that he is
making. You are the Chairman of the
Committee and you and the Hon Members
of the Committee must guide the House,
that is the point. Under this law you can
only detain a human being and leave the
animal.

That is the point he is making. If you
stop the vehicle, you cannot touch that
animal that has the potential of infecting
people with that communicable disease,
on the vehicle. That is the point that he is
making.

Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, you are
right, but I am saying that, we could
propose an amendment to enrich as we
go along. But when you look at clause 9,
most of the time what happens, for
example, is that when you have some
diseases that affect animals, what is
mostly done is the destruction of that
animal but you do not usually have the
issue of quarantine - You restrict the
movement of animals; they destroy them.

But if we have to introduce an
amendment, for example, where we are
talking about clauses 2 and 3, I will
welcome it to further enrich the discussion-

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Chairman
of the Committee, this is a very simple
issue. This Bill is about humans and
animals. [Interruption] Hon Members,
order!

Some Hon Members - rose --

[18]

Mr First Deputy Speaker; Hon
Member for Amenfi East, you were on your
feet. 

Mr Joseph B. Aidoo: Yes, Mr Speaker.

All What the Hon Minority Leader is
Seeking to do is that, as we take clause 3,
we must introduce "animals" to whatever
provision we have there, because when
you look at clause 3 , it talks about humans,
it even talks about corpses and articles
but it says nothing about animals.

So we cannot wait as the Hon Chairman
is trying to do, because what the Hon
Chairman is saying is that, as we go on
then we bring "animals"; If an amendment
can be proposed to introduce "animals"
in clause 3, maybe in sub-cause (1) and
then sub-clause (2), I think it will address
the concern of the Hon Minority Leader.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Chairman
of the Committee, have you. defined "an
article" in the Bill?

Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, not yet
Mr First Deputy Speaker: So what
constitutes "an article"?

Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, when
we get there, we would -~ [Interruption.]
When we get to the Interpretations we
Would define it.

But, Mr Speaker, maybe, to further
propose a further amendment that would
solve this problem is that, where we have
"a person", we simply add "or animal"-
"A person or animal suffering" -
[Interruption.] Just to enrich and take the
sense that the Long Title or the sub-title
describes so that wherever we have "a
person" we add "a person or animal", just
take this concern, so that as we go along
we do same.

Thank you, Mr Speaker.

[19]                               

Mr Kyei Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
I raised this because as he said, we are
trying to aggregate and consolidate the
previous laws. It is not as simple as that
because he himself just cited, clause 9 -
"Destination of animals" - "A veterinary
officer, a medical officer or an authorized
health officer may order the destruction
of an animal" so we are going on that path.

If you come to clause 3, "stopping of
vehicles", in that case, you may also have
to insert "a medical officer, a veterinary
officer", then you include the "animal" so
it is not as simple as that
Perhaps, if it would meet the
convenience of the Hon Deputy Minister
and the Chair, I would suggest that we
suspend this for the time being. Then meet
immediately after this and go through it.

That is because I am not too sure of the
path that We want to tread, we may come
out with a lot of mistakes. So let us do it
and try to get this as part of the
consideration. We could start with that
Mr Speaker, so that we would know that
we are doing a tidy job. But I am not too
sure about the path that the Hon Chairman
is treading.

11.00 am.

Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, I would
Want to suggest that we stand down
clauses 2 and 3. The reason is that, we are
talking about different paths and I would
Want to agree with the Minority Leader
- maybe he has not had time to look at
it. If he had read through, he would see
that it would follow. So that at least we
could stand clauses 2 and 3 down and
continue. Wherever we have real
challenges, We can stand it down and take
a further discussion since at the
Consideration Stage the rules are flexible
and can allow us to be able to take -
[Interruption]

[20]

Mr First Deputy Speaker: So you are
suggesting that we should defer the
question on clause 3?

Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, clauses
2 and 3 . 

Mr First Deputy Speaker: No, I have
put the question on clause 2 already.

Alhaji Muntaka: I am sorry, it should
be on clause 3. Wherever we have a
genuine difficulty, we would stand it down
to enable us discuss it further so that we
can make some progress.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Very well,
that is a compromised position, but before
we proceed further, we have the Hon
Minister for Environment, Science and
Technology with us. I want to suspend
the Consideration Stage so that we can
take Questions, after that we go back. I
believe within that period some
consultations could take place behind the
scene so that we can make progress.

Mr Kyei Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
I would not have anything against that, I
think it would even give us some breathing
space to do further consultations.

I will suggest with respect, that Mr
Speaker, we go back, even though you
have already put the Question on clauses
1 and 2. If you look at clause 2, it talks
about the resort to medical officers, you
have already put the Question on that,
but you need to insert "veterinary officers"
throughout. That I, if you agree with the
principle. 

So even though you have put the
Question, Mr Speaker, with respect, I
would suggest to the Chair that we should
look at it right from the scratch so that we
know that we are on a very good path.

[21]                                          

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Very well,
What I will suggest is that, after the
Question Time, let us see what we can do.
I believe after that, we may be able to
come to a certain level of compromise, if
not, we would decide as a House the way
forward. Question time - [Pause]

Hon Members, as I indicated earlier, we
have the Hon Minister for Environment,
Science and Technology in the House to
respond to Questions from Hon Members.

Hon Minister We have been waiting for
you for a while.

Ms Hanny-Sherry Ayittey (Minister
for Environment, Science and
Technology): Mr Speaker, I think I will
take this opportunity to apologize to the
august House for being late, thank you.
[Interruptions]

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members the Hon Minister has apologized
to the House, so Question 663 standing
in the name of the Hon Member for Tain.

Rev. Dr Joses Akoto-Asare: Mr
Speaker, the Hon Member is unavoidably
absent and may I take permission to ask
the Question on his behalf?

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member for Asuogyaman, the basis of
getting up to ask a Question on behalf of
a Member who is not present  the House
is not because the Member is absent. The
Member must authorize you so to do. If
you have not received any authorization,
then the permission would not be granted.

Rev. Dr Joses Akoto-Asare: He has
authorized me,  Speaker.

[22]

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Very well,
you may ask the Question.

[Resumption of debate at column 55.]

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT,
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

Black Fly on the Bui Hydroelectric
Project (Control)

Rev. Dr Joses Akoto-Asare (on behalf
of Mr Ahmed Ibrahim) asked the Minister
for Environment, Science and Technology
what measures have been instituted to
control the black fly nuisance which. is
threatening the smooth implementation of
the Bui Hydroelectric Project.
[Interruptions]

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, today is the very first day of
our Second Meeting. I think that the noise
is getting out of control. I do not intend
naming anybody.

Ms Hanny-Sherry Ayittey (Minister
for Environment, Science and
Technology): Mr Speaker, the issue of
black fly infestation in the Bui Dam area
is the preserve of the Ministry of Health
and the Ghana Health Services. Mr
Speaker, it would be recalled that the
Ministry of Health successfully carried
out a black fly eradication and
onchocerciasis control programme in the
Northern, Upper East and Upper West
Regions in the 1980s-90s.

This was under a large scale project
with technical support from the World
Health Organization (WHO). At the time,
the Water Research Institute of the
Council for Scientific and Industrial
Research (CSIR)/WRI) participated in the
programme to monitor the environmental
effects of the aerial application of
pesticides along the Black and White Volta
River to ensure that there were no adverse
effects on non-target organisms.

Mr Speaker, the National Onchocerciasis 
Secretariat is the Government
agency responsible for the control and
elimination of the black fly and river
blindness.

[23]                               

[MS AYITTEY]

Indeed, the Headquarters of the
controlling body which was founded by
the World Health Organization (WHO),
was based in Ouagadougou, Burkina-
Faso, and the problem was handled and
dealt with by a team of interdisciplinary
experts from within and outside Ghana and
Burkina-Faso.

After twenty-five (25) years of control
activities by the World Health
Organization (WHO), it was declared that
the incidence of the black fly menace had
been brought under control. Hence the
project came to an end. Since then, the
Ministry of Health has been distributing
drugs to inhabitants of the endemic areas
and conducting sample checks on
residents to prevent its re-occurrence.

Rev. Dr Joses Akoto-Asare: Mr
Speaker, I am satisfied with her answers.

Thank you. 

11.10 am.

Mr Joseph K. Adda: Thank you very
much, Mr Speaker. Indeed, the Committee
on Mines and Energy recently paid a visit
to the Bui Hydro Electric Power Station
area and we discovered that the black fly
still persists; the problem has not come
under control yet. Given many different
reasons why that has not come under
control, we would like to know from the
Hon Minister whether the earlier measures
were successful in controlling the fly from
her Ministry’s point of View; and What
effective next steps are going to be
embarked upon to permanently eradicate
the flies there?

Thank you, Mr Speaker.

Mr Ayittey: Thank you very much, Mr
Speaker. I think the issue of the black fly
menace must be looked at as a national

[24]

problem, and we need to consult the
World Health Organization (WHO) to re-
establish the Onchocerciasis Secretariat
so that we can get funds to revamp the
activities-

Mr Speaker, I think one of the things
that we need to do, which the Minister for
Environment, Science and Technology
had the opportunity to discuss with the
authorities of the Bui Dam, is to carry out
what we call social impact assessment so
that we would be able to estimate the
damage that is going on.

So Mr Speaker, I beg the august House,
if it would direct that the Ministry of
Environment, Science and Technology
and the Ministry of Health work together
to take over this assignment, my Ministry
would be very happy to facilitate that.

Prof. Dominic Fobih: Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Mr Speaker, I think the Question
is asking what the Hon Minister is doing
about the threatening situation affecting
the Bui Dam but the Hon Minister in her
Answer, is saying we need to consult the
WHO, we need to do this, what is she
doing now to at least, ameliorate the
threatening situation of the Dam which is
being constructed. So it is not coming out
Well.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, that is why We have
supplementary questions and that is Why
I have called you.

Ms Ayittey: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I
think earlier, I intimated that the
responsibility is with the Ministry of
Health, and the Ministry of Health some
years ago, was assisted by the WHO. The
environmental issues -- this is what I
have said, that my Ministry and the
Ministry of Health, with the support of
the WHO, can work together and handle
this issue.

Thank you.

[25]                                    

Mr J. B. Aidoo: Mr Speaker, I would
like to know from the Hon Minister, what
has been the effect of the pesticides
application on the people living in the
area?

Mr First Deputy Speaker: I do not
know Whether that is supplementary; it is
not ---

Mr J. B. Aidoo: Mr Speaker, in the Hon
Minister’s own answer, she has indicated
that pesticides were applied as a way of
eliminating the flies in the area, I want to
know the effect of the application of such
chemicals on the people living in the area.

Mr Ayittey: Thank you, Mr Speaker,
the Water Research Institute is carrying
out a research to establish the effect of
the pesticides that they are using for the
eradication. I think that as a scientist, you
would agree with me that the flies always
come out with mutants that sometimes are
resistant to the pesticides. So we will
continue with the work that we are doing
and I believe that, with the Ministry of
Health and the assistance from WHO, we
would be able to do some good
programme.

Thank you.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Last
question, Hon Minority Leader.

Mr Kyei Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
a few questions, not last. First of all, the
Hon Minister tells us, in paragraph l of
her Answer, that the Ministry of Health
successfully carried out a black fly
eradication programme in the Northern,
Upper East and Upper West,Regions in
the 1980s and 1990s. Is it the case then
that black fly menace no longer exists in
the Northern, Upper East and Upper West
Regions?

[26]

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Minority Leader it is a programme. The
Answer says a Control Programme.

Mr Kyei Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
with respect it, is a two-path thing that
she has stipulated. She said that they set
out to eradicate the black fly and control
onchocerciasis. So the question is, is the
black fly menace totally non-existent in
the Northern, Upper East and Upper West
Regions? I ask that because she has said
to us that, they successfully carried out
the eradication. What is the position?

Mr Ayittey: Thank you very much. Mr
Speaker, it is true. You know you can
control the disease that is caused from
the black fly and that has been controlled
in these three Northern Regions. But
because of the environmental nature of
the Bui Dam, that is where we still have
some predominant problems. So it is just
like malaria, you can control malaria in
certain areas but where you have
polluted lagoons that allow the eggs to
multiply, in some areas it becomes very
difficult to do total eradication.

This is what we have done, we have
succeeded. in the Northern Regions; the
Ministry of Health, they succeeded. So
now, we need to concentrate in the area
- the Tain area, more especially with the
construction of the Dam, is also going to
create a problem for the eradication. So
we need to work together and see how we
can minimize the blindness.

Thank you

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,I
agree with what the Hon Minister had
said. l think by and large, they have
succeeded in controlling the menace but
the way she had put it, it is made to appear
as if they have totally eradicated it. They
set out to to eradicate the black fly.

[27]                                        

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon Minority
Leader, look at paragraph 4 of the Answer.

Mr Kyei Mensah-Bonsu: Yes, that is
the reason because when she said that
they have done that successfully, and
in paragraph 4, she says that they have
brought it under control; so which is
which? That is the point that '1 wanted
to make.

But Mr Speaker, another point. Paragraph
2, the Hon Minister tells us that the
"National Onchocerciasis Secretariat", I
think there is a mix ~up there but I believe
she wanted to say that the National
Onchocerciasis Secretariat is the
government agency responsible for the
control and elimination of the black fly
and river blindness-

That is what she wanted to say, so it is
a typographical error.

Paragraph 3 is not very clear. The
Hon Minister tells us that, the National
Onchocerciasis Secretariat was based in
Ouagadougou, our National Onshocerciasis 
Secretariat, is based in
Ouagadougou. Can she talk to the
microphone, because it is not to me
alone, with respect.

Mr Ayittey: Mr Speaker, at th.at time,
it was a zonal project including the
controlling in Burkina Faso also. So the
headquarters was based there and we
had the Secretariat in Ghana; so it was a
multi-sectoral. project between Burkina-
Faso and Ghana.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: What was
based in Ghana and what was based in
Burkina Faso? That is the question.

Mrs Ayittey: The headquarters was
based in Burkina Faso but the Secretariat
that does the day-to-day administration
and financial management that is based
in Accra. It is still there but they are
poorly resourced. So with funds, they
can start work.

[28]

Mr Charles S. Hodogbey: Thank you Mr
Speaker. Mr Speaker, l just want to
concentrate my question on paragraph
4.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: You have only
one question.

Mr Hodogbey: In paragraph 4, the Hon
Minister stated and I quote,

"After 25 years of control activities
by the World Health Organization
(WHO), it was declared that the
incidence of the black fly menace had
been brought under control."

Then she went on to say that, they
provide

"drugs to inhabitants of the
endemic areas and conducting
sample checks on residents to
prevent its re-occurrence."

I would like to know if the menace has
been brought under control. The way I
understand it, "control" means it has
been reduced or nothing has existed. Why
are they giving drugs to the people?

11.20.a.m

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member for North Tongu, that is the issue
that we. have just discussed. It was not
totally eradicated but it was brought -
that was the question the Hon Minority
Leader brought up - That it was brought
under control. Through that process, we
got to know it was not eradicated; it was
only brought under control. If something
is brought under control, it means that it
is there but it is not as serious as it used
to be at the beginning, therefore, they
distribute these drugs so as to make sure
that it does not get out of control.

Mr Hodogbey: Mr Speaker, if sample
checks had been done routinely I would
like to know the results of those sample
checks.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Minister, the results of the sample checks.

[29]                                   

Ms Ayittey: Mr Speaker, I have
mentioned earlier that now we at the
Ministry of Environment, Science and
Technology are not really handling this
project. This is being handled by the
Ghana Health Services. So, maybe I can
try and get the results and present it to
the august House.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, We move to the next Question
- Question number 874 - standing in
the name of the Hon Member for Agona
East.

Hon Member for Agona East?

Prof (Emeritus) Amoako: Mr Speaker,
the Hon Member for Agona East is not in
the House and I have his permission to
ask the Question on his behalf.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: You cannot
have his permission because he has not
authorized you.

Prof (Emeritus) Amoako: Mr Speaker,
he has authorized me to seek for your
indulgence to ask the Question on his
behalf.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Very well.
Effect of Climate change measures
taken to assist farmers

874. Prof (Emeritus) Samuel K.
Amoako (on behalf of Mr John
Agyabeng) asked the Minister for
Environment, Science and Technology
what measures the Ministry had put in
place to collaborate with the Ministry of
Food and Agriculture to assist farmers in
the light of the effect of climate change
on the activities of the farmers.

[30]

Ms Hanny-Sherry Ayittey:_ Mr
Speaker, I think with the permission of the
House, I can try to summarize.

Madam Speaker, we know Climate
Change is real and is already impacting
on the energy, water, agriculture and some
other sectors of the economy.

It is obvious that agriculture is the
backbone of the Ghanaian economy,
therefore any negative impact resulting
from climatic conditions will have serious
impact on food security.

In this regard, the Ministry of
Environment, Science and Technology
(MEST) collaborates with front line
Ministries such as the Ministries of Food
and Agriculture(MOFA), Health and
Lands and Natural Resources to
addressing climate change and climate
variability issues in a collaborative
manner.

Mr Speaker, the collaboration to
address climate change and climate
variability issues could be highlighted in
the following areas:

MOFA is fully represented at the
National Climate Change Committee
which is the National Coordinating
body for climate change issues in
the country. Under this Committee
there are a number of technical
working groups and one of such
Working groups is the group on
agriculture. The representatives
from MOFA on the Climate Change
Committee share decisions, policies
and strategic initiatives in climate
change with relevant stakeholders
in the agricultural sector, which
farmers are key.

MEST through the EPA has
conducted climate change impacts
and vulnerability studies for

[31]                                

[MS AYITTEY]

ecological zones in the country.
This study has aided targeted
climate change adaptation
interventions especially in the
farming communities in parts of the
northern region.

MEST, through the EPA, has also
collaborated with MOFA in the
preparation of Food and Agriculture
Sector Development Policy Two
(FASDEP II) Which addresses food
security and sustainable agriculture
comprehensively. One of the key
hallmarks of the FASDEP II
document is that, issues of the
environment and climate change
have been mainstreamed into the
policy.

MOFA also has a unit on
Environment. MEST, through its
Departments and Agencies has
been working closely with this Unit.

MEST currently is implementing the
Ghana Sustainable Land and Water
Management Project (GSLWMP) in
the three northern regions. The
GSLWMP is funded by a Global
Environment Facility (GEF) Grant to
support the Government of Ghana
to (a) improve land management of
selected micro-watersheds in
Northern Ghana to reverse land
degradation and enhance
agricultural productivity; (b) it will
also improve spatial planning
through integration of Watershed
management plans.

This five year project aims to
support the Sustainable
Development Initiative for the
Northern Savanna to realize the
vision of "a diversified and resilient
economic zone in the north" with
significant regional environmental
benefits.

[32]

In addition to this, the MEST
through the EPA is also
collaborating with other relevant
institutions to implement the Ghana
Environmental Management
Projects (GEMP). 

The GEMP is a five-year project
funded by the Canadian
Government to support the
Government of Ghana to address
desertification in northern Ghana.
The goal of GEMP is to strengthen
Ghanaian institutions and rural
communities to enable them to
reverse land degradation and
desertification in the three northern
regions of Ghana and adopt
sustainable land and water
management systems that improve
food security and reduce poverty.

MEST also Works in closer
collaboration with MOFA to
provide early warning systems for
farmers:

Early warning information on
pests infestations

Disease outbreak
Rainfall patterns, et cetera.

With temperatures rising as a result
of global Warming, MEST
collaborates with MOFA in the area
of bush or Wildfire prevention and
control in farming communities in
the country. We have carried out a
lot of exercises in the northern part
of Ghana. We had involved the
traditional authorities in the area of
wildfire prevention.

On awareness creation and
information dissemination on climate
change, MEST through its
Departments and Agencies, and in
collaboration with other Ministries
has used a number of communication
media such as

[33]                                   

[MS AYITTEY]

Community durbars

NGOs and civil society

Focal group discussions

Stakeholder meetings at the local
level

Community radio broadcasts

Local information vans

To educate farmers on the impacts of
climate change on their livelihoods. An
example is the Fanteakwa District in the
Eastern Region and many other districts
in the northern sector through the EPA-
VODAF ONE SLM and GEMP projects.

MEST through the Africa
Adaptation Programme (AAP) is
currently assisting farmers in five
districts including Aowin Suaman
(Western), Keta (Volta), Fanteakwa
(Eastern), Sissala East (Upper West),
and West Mamprusi (Northern) on
various projects which will help
them adapt to the impacts of climate
change.

In the area of research and
technology application, the
Ministry through the CSIR has
developed early maturity crop
varieties. The Center has also come
out with drought-resistant crop
varieties. These and other
interventions are efforts to assist
farmers adapt to the impacts of
climate change and climate
variability.

Mr Speaker, we continuously visit
farmers and educate them on when to
plant- We are also advising farmers on the
use of fertilizers and how to prepare the
soil to make the best advantage of the
raining season.

[34]

11.30 am.

Prof (Emeritus) Amoako: Mr Speaker,
the Question specifically was asking for
the effect of climate change. And even
though the Answer looks very
comprehensive and elaborate, I did not
hear of any interventions in the area of
building dams. What has the Ministry
done about using dams to help farmers
control climatic change?

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, you know that Questions to
Ministers are what they are responsible
for. That is what our rules say and the
Ministry of Environment is not
responsible for building dams for farmers.

That is a question that goes to the
Ministry of Food and Agriculture. So ask
another supplementary question.

Prof (Emeritus) Amoako: Very well Mr
Speaker.

Mr Speaker, I want to refer to the Hon
Minister’s Answer on page 34, under the
second bullet point where it says and with
your permission I quote:

"To educate farmers on the impacts
of climate change on their
livelihoods. An example is the
Fanteakwa District in the "Eastern
Region and many other districts in
the northern sector through the
EPA-VODAFONE SLM and GEMLP
projects."

The intervention of the information
dissemination, what language is used in
the various communities? This is because
Mr Speaker, I happened to share the same
boundary with Fanteakwa District and
there is a problem with the dissemination
of information. They do not use the right
language which the farmers understand.

Ms Ayittey: Mr Speaker,_these are
public education, they are done through
the community radios. So obviously one
would expect that using the community

[35]                                      

[MS AYITTEY]

Frequency Modulation (FM) stations,
they would speak the predominant
language Within the area. But if that has
not gone done well, we can repeat the
exercise using the appropriate language
again. 

Prof (Emeritus) Amoako -rose -

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Your last
supplementary question.

Prof (Emeritus) Amoako: Mr Speaker,
page 33 of the Hon Minister’s Answer and
I refer to the last sentence of the third
bullet point and with your permission I
quote:

"The goal of GEMP is to strengthen
Ghanaian institutions and rural
communities to enable them to
reverse land degradation and
desertification in the three northern
regions of Ghana and adopt
sustainable land and water
management systems that improve
food security and reduce poverty."

This part of the Answer is too general.

Would the Hon Minister please tell us
specifically what has been done in the area
of reversing degradation and
desertification of this part of our country?

Ms Ayittey: Mr Speaker, as I said, this
particular project is community-based and
we are involving the traditional
authorities- I said that we had a durbar
with the chiefs and then we took them
through bush fire prevention which is very
common in the three northern regions. We
exposed them to the District Assembly
bye-laws that can empower them to check
bush fires and also to check charcoal
production. 

[36]

Then also, we have engaged the District
Assemblies themselves. They have
formed small communities, which they
manage. The resources are given to them
and we help them with the Seedlings like
drought-resistance seedlings and then we
also help them with small irrigation
technologies so that they can improve
upon their own farming.

We are doing this both for the
Assemblies and we have also engaged the
women farmers in these projects. So this
particular programme is a grass-roots one
and it is being managed by the
Assemblies themselves.

Prof (Emeritus) Amoako: Mr Speaker,
I think you disallowed my first question
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, yes, the one I disallowed is part
of the three.

Anyway, I will allow you.

Prof (Emeritus) Amoako: Thank you
Mr Speaker.

Mr Speaker, I just want to have the
understanding of the level of
collaboration between her Ministry and
the Ministry of Food and Agriculture,
because I do not know who is doing what.
If she can explain the level of collaboration
between the two Ministries-

Ms Ayittey: Mr Speaker, at the district,
we have the agriculture inspection
agencies and in fact they are part of the
management of this project. We have a
national project co-ordinator who works
with the agriculture extension agencies in
all these districts. Within the District
Assemblies also, there are representatives
and they help us to design the project for
that particular community.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, we move to the last Question
for the day. Question number 876
standing in the name of the Hon Member
for Offinso North.

[37]                                         

Formulation of Laws and Regulations
on Environmental Pollution

876. Mr Augustine Collins Ntim
asked the Minister for Environment,
Science and Technology what measures
the Ministry was putting in place to
formulate the necessary laws and
regulations on environmental pollution for
the country.

Ms Ayittey: Mr Speaker, I think I can-

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Your
Answer is rather long. I do not know
whether you would --

Ms Ayittey: I would like to summarize
it for you.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Very well.

Ms Ayittey: Madam Speaker, Chapter
six, article 41(k) of the 1992 Constitution
of the 4th Republic enjoins the citizens of
Ghana to protect and safeguard the
environment. It is therefore not out of
place that Parliament passed the
Environmental Protection Agency Act,
1994, (Act 490).

Subsequently, the Environmental
Assessment Regulation, 1999 (L.I. 1652)
was passed to give meaning to specific
provisions of Act. 490. The process of
environmental permitting is therefore
based on Environmental Assessment
Regulations, 1999 (L.I. 1652).

The aim of the environmental
assessment process is to ensure that all
potential environmental and social
impacts of any undertaking are fully
investigated and appropriately managed
before, during and after the operations of
the project. In fact the L.I. 1652 clearly
defines the scope of projects and the form
of assessment required of them.

[38]

MEST through the EPA and in
collaboration with other relevant
stakeholder institutions have been
working on the draft National
Environmental Quality Guidelines which
were prepared with reference to section
28 of the Environmental Protection
Agency Act, 1994. These guidelines are
the basis for the draft regulations, namely
the National Environmental Quality
Standards Regulations. The draft
regulations comprise standards for the
following environmental media.

Short Term Programme

a. Noise Pollution
In recent times the issue of excessive
noise has been of serious concern,
especially in built-up residential areas.
Sound is measured in decibel (dB), in
Ghana as permissible ambient noise set
by the EPA.

The Agency has therefore developed
guidelines and standards required to
address noise levels ranging from
residential to commercial/industrial areas:
The EPA’s permissible ambient
noise levels in residential areas
during the day is 55 decibels (dB)
and 48 dB at night.

At and around educational and
health facilities, it is 55 during the
day, 50 at night.

Noise level for areas with
commercial or light industrial
activities is 6O (dB) during the day
and 55 (dB) during the night. Light
industrial areas and places of
entertainment, public assembly
such as churches and mosques
allow 65 dB noise levels during the
day and 60 during the night

[39]                                      


[MS AYITTEY]

Predominant commercial areas allow
70dB during the day and 65 dB
during the night.

For heavy industrial areas 70 dB
noise during the day and the night.

2. Land

22.1 Ghana’s obligations under the
Stockholm Convention on Persistent
Organic Pollutants (POPs) and the
Rotterdam Convention on Prior Informal
Consent Produce for Certain Hazardous
Chemicals and Pesticides in International
Trade mandates the Ministry to enact
legislation to regulate and manage the
use, trade, transport and the disposal of
chemicals in the country.

In exercise of the power conferred on
the Ministry of Environment, Science and
Technology, under section 62 of the
Environmental Protection Agency Act,
1994 (Act 490), the following draft
Regulation for Pesticides Control and
Management of Chemicals have been
prepared and awaiting parliamentary
approval:

Draft Pesticides (Advertising)
 Regulations;

Draft Pesticides (Labelling and
Packing) Regulations;

Draft Pesticides (Registration)
Regulations; and

Draft Technical Guidelines for
Pesticides Transportation, Storage
and Disposal.

23 Under the Basel Convention on
the Transboundary Movement of
Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal and
the related Basel Protocol on Liability and

[40]

Compensation for Damage resulting from
Transboundary Movement of Hazardous
Wastes and their Disposal, Hazardous
and Electronic Waste Control and
Management Bill, 2011 has been prepared
to provide for the control, management
and disposal of disposal of hazardous
waste and electronic waste and for related
purposes. The Bill is now going through
final stages of stakeholder consultations.

3. Water Pollution

3.1 Marine Pollution Bill

Ghana ratified the MARPOI
Convention which is concerned with oil
pollution. The convention aims at
achieving complete elimination of
international pollution of the marine
environment by oil and other harmful
substances from ships and to minimize the
accidental discharge of such substance.

Ghana’s Marine Pollution law
formulated in 1964 had not seen any
review to address emerging challenges,
particularly of the oil industry.
The new Marine Pollution Bill jointly
prepared by the Ghana Maritime Authority
and the Environmental Protection Agency
will incorporate the Convention on Oil
Pollution Preparedness, Response, Co~
operation and Dumping of Wastes to
address the challenges of the oil industry.

4. Air Pollution

4.1 Air Quality and Emission Policy

The Ministry has secured Cabinet
approval on Air Quality and Emission
Policy. The policy seeks to initiate
strategies to reduce emission with
attractive co-benefits by reducing future
generation’s health locally. It would also
have additional positive impacts on
climate change nationally and globally.

[41]                                        

[MS AYITTEY]

The policy also sets up the framework
for the development of emission
standards and guideline for testing and
monitoring of emissions based on generic
emission targets that take into
consideration fuel-efficiency and clean
combustion and modem technology.

5. Buffer Zone Policy

The Ministries of Water Resources,
Works and Housing and Environment,
Science and Technology are jointly
submitting for Cabinet approval, a riparian
Buffer Zone Policy for managing
freshwater bodies in Ghana.

Buffer zones provide natural services
such as improving water quality by
trapping sediment and chemicals from run-
off before reaching water bodies;
moderates flooding, help recharge
groundwater and prevent soil erosion;
creates shade which lower temperatures
and hence improve habitat for aquatic
organisms; and provides food, nesting
cover and shelter for wildlife.

Buffer zones also provide valuable
socio-economic services including
creation of jobs in the planting and
maintenance of economic trees; provision
of valuable timber and income from non~
timber forest products such as forage and
fruits; provision of indigenous multi-
species of plants traditionally harvested
for medicine and material for building;
conserving natural scenic areas of
recreational value, cropping, and
ecotourism; provision of potable water
supply for local communities; and support
fish pollutions for many fishing
communities.

In order to begin realizing these
identified valuable and other potential
services from the establishment of buffer

[42]

zones, and to curb the discriminate
dumping and the development of
infrastructure in waterways, the policy
harmonizes all traditional and existing
public institutional standards on buffers
bordering water bodies or river systems.
The policy also focuses on providing
measures that would guide the co-
ordinated creation of vegetative buffers
for the preservation and functioning of
our water bodies and vital ecosystems.

b. Industrial Effluent Discharge Quality

The draft National Environment
Quality Guidelines provide basis for
prescribed limits, for industrial effluent
discharge quality for specific industrial
sectors including food and beverage,
textile, paint and chemicals, metals and
others. While the Ministry continue with
broad consultations on the draft
regulations prior to sending it to
Parliament to pass the National
Environmental Quality Guidelines into law
(regulations), industries are required to
ensure that wastewater discharges from
their operations meet the permissible limits
of the EPA Nation Environmental Quality
Guidelines (NEQGs), which when passed
into law would include pollution charges
mandated under section 28, Act 490.

Such pollution charges would provide
the needed cost/benefit required for
decision-making and also drives voluntary
pollution reduction programmes using
cleaner production approaches
particularly in the industrial sector.

MIEST through EPA has systematically
initiated compliance promotion and
regulatory actions that integrate
environmental concerns, promotion,
development aspirations. Some of the
measures adopted by the EPA include:

The establishment of a sub-regional
Cleaner Production Center, a center of
excellence, located at Tema, to enhance
the country’s capacity to assist industries,

[43]                                        

[MS AYTITEY]

develop and implement cleaner and
resource efficient production programmes
that Will improve results in reduced
manufacturing costs, lower pollution and
improved health and safety performance.

Institutionalization of the Akoben
Environmental Performance Rating and
Public Disclosure to develop an
information regulatory system so as to
drive the Agency’s continuous
environmental improvement (CB1)
programmes for enterprises.

There is the need to facilitate the
passing of the National Environmental
Quality Guidelines into law since this will
help regulatory work as well as the
compliance promotion facet of the
Agency’s work.

Biosafety Bill

This Bill which deals with genetically
modified seed, its regulation for
implementation and uses has been passed
by Parliament and signed by the President
of the Republic of Ghana.

Regulations for Installation, Deployment
of Communication Towers/Mast

This regulation was issued on 12 May,
2010 and gazetted on 14th January, 2011
and distributed to all mobile phone
operators and the National
Communication Authority

Nuclear Safety

Laws and Treaties put in place

The Application of Safeguards in
Connection with the Treaty on Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(July, 1973);

[44]

Additional Protocol to the
Agreement between the
Government of the Republic of
Ghana and the IAEA for the
Application of Safeguards in
Connection with the Treaty on Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(June, 1998);

The Convention on Physical
Protection of Nuclear Material
(October, 2002);

Parliament has also ratified the
Convention on Nuclear Safety (July,
1995);

The Comprehensive Nuclear Test
Ban Treaty (CTBT);

The African Nuclear Weapon Free
Zone (Pelindaba) Treaty;

Amendment to the Convention on
Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material (2005);

The joint Convention on the Safety
of Spent Fuel Management and on
the Safety of Radioactive Waste
Management (the Joint
Convention);

Cabinet has given approval for
ratification of the Convention on
Assistance in the Case of Nuclear
 Accident or Radiological
Emergency;

The Convention on early
Notification of a Nuclear Accident
and the Convention on
Supplementary Compensation for
Nuclear Damage (CSC).

National Environment Policy
This is in its final stage of consultation
with stakeholders/ civil society/NGOs for
Cabinet approval.

[45]                                         

[MS AYITTEY]

National Climate Change Policy
Draft policy is ready for final approval
by stakeholders.

Land Use and Spatial PlanningAuthority
Bill

The Bill which is currently before
Cabinet for approval is intended to look
at land use at the regional and district
planning level for accelerated
development.

11.40 am.

Mr Ntim: Mr Speaker, I thank the Hon
Minister for the kind of comprehensive
answer given. But I get so much worried,
so much alarmed in the face of all these
Regulations, anytime I drive pass the Birim
River heading towards my constituency.
The level of turbidity, the level of
pollution, the level of environmental
degradation as a result of uncontrolled
mining activities. To what extent is her
Ministry collaborating with the Ministry
of Mines and Energy to address that
canker?

Thank you.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, that is not strictly speaking
supplementary because you have now
brought in Ministry of Mines and Energy
and the rest. But I will allow the question
so far as it deals with environmental
pollution.

Ms Ayittey: Mr Speaker, recently, the
Hon Minister for Lands and Natural
Resources and myself, controlling the
Mining Sector, took a tour of some of
these seriously degraded areas and there
is a National Security Task Force for
Natural Resources, headed by Brigadier

[46]

Mishio. We are working together so that
they can be resourced to bring the
activities of illegal miners under control.
The important part as I mentioned, is also
on the Buffer Zone Policy because the
Buffer Zone Policy, when it is passed into
a law, means that, you would have to
leave about 50 to 100 meters as a buffer
zone from any water body and that would
go a long way to help us to police the
activities of these people.

11.50 am .

Mr Ntim: Mr Speaker, the Hon Minister
has done a comprehensive work with
respect to the environmental pollution and
degradation but with respect to water
pollution, she touched only on the Marine
Pollution Bills.

As a country, the major problem that
We have with regard to water has to do
with the rivers, lakes and water bodies, I
get the impression that, as a Ministry,
she has not done much or has not
sufficient Regulations to be able to protect
those various water bodies. That explains
why rivers like the Offin River, the Birim
and most of the major rivers we have in
the country are being destroyed, they are
being degraded. Can she answer that?

Ms Ayittey: Mr Speaker, with humility,
I disagree with the Hon Member of
Parliament because we have the Water
Resources Commission, their whole
mandate is to protect Water bodies. We
also have the Ministry of Water
Resources, Works and Housing, that is
the core mandate of the Ministry - so
when we come in and then if he is talking
about mining activities, this is what l am
saying, that now, we are coming out with
this importation of hazardous chemical
goods. We can control the importation of
dangerous chemicals like cyanide and
mercury that these illegal miners use.

[47]                                        

[MS AYITTEY]

Then, when you come to mining, you
have Minerals Commission, then you have
the Minerals Inspectorate Division under
the Minerals Commission, they have to
regulate the activities of those companies
they have issued licenses to. We manage
the disposal of their effluent, we make sure
- recently, we have asked all the mining
companies to install distillation plants so
that every liquid that is going to be released
into the environment is going to be
distilled into hundred per cent pure water.

Factories and manufacturing
companies are also expected to treat every
liquid that they release into the
atmosphere. All these are outlined in the
Environmental Permit.

Thank you.

Mr Ntim: Mr Speaker, I just want to
find out from the Hon Minister whether
she can give a word of assurance. Now,
the adage, Akyem Kwaa onom Birim is
no longer valid because of the level of
pollution. I think it is a major concern.
Can she assure the House that her
Ministry is going to work in collaboration
with_all the necessary agencies to restore
the sanity of the Birim River?

Ms Ayittey: Mr Speaker, I mentioned
earlier than the Hon Minister for Lands
and Natural Resources (Hon Mike
Hammah) and myself are working
together to resource the National Security
Task Force. Currently, my Ministry and
the Water Commission are also presenting
a Bill through Cabinet to Parliament and
Hon E. T. Mensah is here, we have signed
it together and I can assure you that it is
our responsibility to make sure that
Ghanaians have access to quality drinking
water.

[48]

The Ministry of Environment, Science
and Technology.would work very hard to
ensure that we live up to our mandate.

Mr George Kofi Arthur: Mr Speaker,
as the Hon Member mentioned, the only
Bill here that we are dealing with, is the
Marine Pollution Bill which does not talk
much about streams, rivers and other water
bodies. May I know from the Hon
Minister, she mentioned that the small
scale miners have tempered with the rivers
in his constituency. My constituency
also, they have tempered with almost
every river including streams and nothing
has been done about it.

May I know which policy talks about
prevention of these pollutions in these
small scale miners, the way they are
polluting the rivers - which policy talks
about the prevention? Can she give us
any policy that talks about it?

Ms Ayittey: Mr Speaker, I think we
have the Minerals Commission as I
mentioned-

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Minister, before the people go to do the
mining, do they not get EPA
authorization? That is really why Hon
Members are asking you these questions.

The role of EPA, and the impact
assessment that is supposed to be done
before the people go there, that is why
the Members of Parliament, a lot of them
have taken interest in this Question, I
saw a lot of them on their feet, that is why
I am trying to interject so that we can save
some time.

Ms Ayittey: Mr Speaker, we have illegal
miners and before a small scale mining
company commences operation, they do
obtain environmental permit from EPA-
[Interruption] - from my Ministry and
the big mining companies. We regulate
them through the Akoben but the problem
that is facing us is the quantum of what
we call galamsey operators. It is a serious
issue, We have submitted a memorandum
on it to the Presidency so that we look at

[49]                                    

[MS AYTITEY]

it as a national issue. So many people are
entering this country Without the requisite
permit. They are degrading our natural
resources. It is a national issue and as I
mentioned earlier on, We are working with
the National Security Committee on
Natural Resources so that we can resource
them and flush them out of these areas.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, I will take two more, one from
each side. Hon Member for Techiman
North and then Hon Member for North
Tongu.

Prof. Christopher Ameyaw-Ekumfi:
Mr Speaker, the issue about fresh water
pollution coming out of the Answer that
you gave is very simple. You have
collaborated with the Ministry of
Transport on the Marine Pollution Bill, so,
Colleagues are asking you to indicate the
collaborative approaches in coming out
with Regulations on fresh water pollution.

MI Speaker, that is not quite clear from
the Answer. To my substantive question,
on the Marine Pollution Bill, Mr Speaker,
is the Hon Minister satisfied that this deals
adequately with pollution problems
associated with the oil industry and
whether this is enough to fit into the
Petroleum Exploration and Production Bill
as far as pollution is concerned.

12.00 noon

Ms Ayittey: Mr Speaker, on my
collaboration, especially, with other
sectors, I mentioned that we have
collaborated with the Water Resources
Commission and we have developed the
buffer zone policy, so, this will assist us
to manage our fresh water pollution. This
policy is currently before Cabinet for
approval, that is why it is not here.

[50]

On the Marine Pollution Bill, it would
come to Parliament. We have done
stakeholders consultation and then we
would also expect your wisdom and your
input to enrich the Bill when it is laid before
you for discussion. It is at the Committee
level -- [interruptions]-- yes, it has
come here, it is here -- the Clerk knows
about it. The Hon Member was also talking
about the pollution, Mr Speaker, this
illegal mining activity is a national issue
and I would appeal to Parliament to help
because we are doing our best.

It is not only environment, Immigration
is involved, the Police Service is involved,
the traditional authorities are involved,
land use management is involved. So we
expect and we are appealing to everybody
to assist us and the Ministry of Lands
and Natural Resources, so that we can
work together in a collaborative manner
to bring this big problem under control.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: I will take
the last question.

Mr Charles S. Hodogbey: Mr Speaker,
in the Hon Minister’s answer, she
addressed several areas of pollution. I
believe Ghana is a signatory to several
international Conventions on the
degradation of the environment, such as
the Stockholm Declaration, the Rio
Declaration, the Kyoto Declaration and
many others. All of these, about the
"polluter pays" principle, meaning
whatever industry or person who pollutes
the environment pays for the cost.

But in the Hon Minister‘s address, even
when she came to the issue of land -- if
you drive around Accra, you will see so
many sachets - these non-degradable
materials lying all over, in the Hon
Minister’s Answer, she never addressed
that issue. When I was in the Western
Region, I saw so many rivers de-coloured.
I would like to know whether by" the
"polluter pays" principle, her Ministry is
able to enforce that law for polluters to
pay - [Interruption]

[51]                                 

Dr A. A. Osei: Mr Speaker, on a point
of order. Mr Speaker, my Colleague in
trying to ask the question said that "in
her address to us."

Mr Speaker, I have not seen the Hon
Minister addressing this House, she was
summoned here to answer a Question and
not to address the House. So I do not
know if he is referring to an earlier address
that she gave somewhere.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: I was
waiting for him to properly land and then
draw his attention and ask him what
address he was talking about

Dr A. A. Osei: Yes, Mr Speaker. He
was losing me when he said "in her
address". So I was going to ask where
she addressed us and when?

Mr Hodogbey: I am sorry, Mr Speaker,
I was referring to the Hon Minister’s
Answer. So what I was asking is, having
mentioned all these and with the "polluter
pays" principle in all these Conventions,
has she taken any step to ensure that
those companies manufacturing water,
companies mining in the Western Region
pay for the cost of removing the pollution.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: I think the
question is whether there is any measure
in place for people who pollute the
environment to pay for the cost of the
pollution.

Ms Ayittey: Mr Speaker, the Hon
Member talked about sachet water. Mr
Speaker, last year, Cabinet approved a
policy that, from 2012, we need to look at
the importation of certain grams of plastic
materials and I also mentioned that
currently, we have placed before Cabinet
the E-Waste and Hazardous Chemical Bill
which I believe would be before this
august House before you rise. And then
Mr Speaker, this coming Friday, the

[52]

Ministry and other agencies would be
launching the Plastic Waste Awareness
campaign at Efua Sutherland Park.

I would take this opportunity to invite
Hon Members of this House to come and
join us. We have had several meetings
with the Sachet Water Manufacturing
Association, they have asked us to assist
them so that they can transform their
business into a more environmentally
friendly one. We are currently in
consultations with almost all the various
bodies that pollute the environment
When it comes to mining Mr Speaker,
mining companies before they commence
operations, have to do what we call
reclamation bond and this reclamation
bond has to be placed in stocks and also
in physical cash. It is placed in our banks
so that in case of dangerous
environmental pollution coming from a
company, we can lay hands on this money
and then restore quickly the environment.

Currently, we are reviewing the
situation with the reclamation bond for all
the mining companies and I think that the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
and the consultants are working very
hard to ensure that companies that pollute
pay responsibly for their pollution.

Mr Kyei Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
let me commend the Hon Minister for the
attempt to comprehensively deal with the
question that was raised. I think she
normally endeavors to be as
comprehensive as possible in answers
she provides to this House. I am looking
forward to this issue about effecting or
giving effect to matters relating to noise
pollution, particularly, as you said, in built-
up areas and also to have a proper land
use and special planning programme.
Mr Speaker, what is happening in
Ghana is really uncontrolled, uncoordinated 
and haphazard land use; it is
not helping our cause at all. If you go to

[53]                                          

[MR KYEI MENSAH-BONSU]

other African countries, you would see a
very different picture and I think we would
encourage her to go on this path.

Mr Speaker, to remind the Hon
Minister, the Question is:

"To ask the Ministry for
Environment, Science and
Technology what measures the
Ministry is putting in place to
formulate the necessary laws and
regulations on environmental
pollution for the country."

The Ministry in this case is the State -
the obligation of the State. Mr Speaker,
unfortunately, in her Answer, the Hon
Minister draws attention to article 41(k).
Article 41(k) Mr Speaker, with respect to
the Hon Minister relates to duties of a
citizen. We are talking about what role the
state should be playing and with respect,
may I draw attention of the Hon Minister
to article 36 (9) which provides as follows:

"The State shall take appropriate
measures needed to protect and
safeguard the national environment
for posterity. . ."

Mr Speaker, would the Hon Minister
agree that she got it wrong this time?

12.10 p.m.

Ms Ayittey: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I
think I got it wrong. It is supposed to be
article 36 (9) of the 1992 Constitution.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Thank you
very much, Hon Minister, for attending
upon the House to respond to Questions
from Hon Members. Hon Minister, you
are discharged.

Hon Members, that brings us to the
end of Question time.

Chairman of the Health Committee,
what is the position now?

[54]

Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, we have
had the understanding together with the
Hon Minority Leader and the Director for
Public Health and we have agreed that,
yes, it was very, very relevant that between
clauses 1 and 16, there were some
omissions of "or a person", so we have
addressed that, and with your indulgence,
we would want to take them on board and
move on so that we can make some
progress.

Dr A. A. Osei: Mr Speaker, I do not
know whether my Hon Leader is a Member
of the Health Committee. The Hon
Chairman speaks on behalf of the
Committee so to get up and say, "I have
consulted with the Minority Leader", it is
the Committee’s work that we are looking
at not to -

Mr First Deputy Speaker: No, Hon
Member, you were not here. An issue
cropped up.

Dr A. A. Osei: Mr Speaker, I was here.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Yes, you
were here; very well. An issue cropped
up and it was raised initially by the Hon
Minority Leader.

Dr A. A. Osei: Yes, Mr Speaker, but--
Mr First Deputy Speaker: And several
suggestions came on the floor as to the
way forward.

DrA. A. Osei: Mr Speaker, my point
is that I do not know if his Committee
Members could agree with his
discussion ~-

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Very Well.

It is important that he also consults his
Committee Members.

Dr A. A. Osei: Yes, Mr Speaker.

[55]                                   

Mr First Deputy Speaker: So what is
the new rendition?

Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, with
your indulgence, if you can slack the
rules of the House at the Consideration
Stage --

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Very well.

Thank you very much for reminding me.
Hon Members, we have gone back to
the Consideration Stage.

BILLS -- CONSIDERATION STAGE

Public Health Bill, 2011
[Resumption of debate from column
21]

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Thank you
very much.

Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, if you
could relax the rules of the Consideration
Stage for us to go back to clause 2, with
your indulgence.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: We will
continue and take it at the Second
Consideration Stage. [Pause] Yes, Hon
Minority Leader, let me hear from you.

Mr Kyei Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
I think the road suggested by the Hon
Chairman would help the House so if we
can, go back to clause 2 and maybe begin
from there so that we are all clear in our
minds the direction; with respect to the
Chair.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Is it the
relaxation of the rules or going against
the rules? This is because I have put the
Question and the rules are very clear on
this matter, but I Want to find a way out of
it. I agree, because I suspect the reason

[56]

why you are pushing this is that it is
consequential. It would be consequential
for us to start from there; I know that is
why. So I have relaxed the rules.

Alhaji Muntaka: Thank you, Mr
Speaker. Mr Speaker, then we would start
from clause 2 (2).

Mr First Deputy Speaker: So the
Question that I have put on clause 2 has
been vacated and it is deemed as if I have
not put the Question on clause 2, because
the issue being raised is very fundamental
to the Bill.

Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, clause 2
sub-clause (2), line 1, after "all persons"
we insert "animals" so that it will read, if
you will allow me to take it again, Mr
Speaker.

We are re-writing or we are deleting
subclasses (2) and inserting in its place:
"The order for evacuation may
apply to a person or animal or a class
of persons or species of animals
specified in the instrument."

Mr Speaker, the reason is, as we earlier
discussed, because we are talking about
protection of both humans and animals,
we felt that we needed to make this
incorporation to be able to take care of
not only humans but animals as well. That
is why we are doing this.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, this amendment is informed by
discussions that had taken place on the
floor of the House earlier, starting with
the Hon Minority Leader, so I would put
the Question.

Question put and amendment agreed
to.

[57]                                    

Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, sub-
clause (3) of clause 2, line 1, after "a
person" we insert "animal", and then line
4, after "medical officer" we insert
"veterinary officer".

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Which
clause are you talking about?

Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, clause 2
sub-clause (3).

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Very well.

Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, in-line 1,
after "a person" we insert "or animals"
and then in line 4, after "medical officer"
we insert "or veterinary officer" and in
the same line 4, at the tail end, we have "a
medical officer". After that "medical
officer" again, we have "or a veterinary
officer" so that the new rendition will read,
with your indulgence, Mr Speaker, as
follows: 

"A person or animal shall not reside,
enter or carry on businesses within
an infected area or a part of an
infected area in contravention of an
order for evacuation except under
an order in writing to that effect
signed by the medical officer or
veterinary officer and under
conditions specified by the medical
officer or veterinary officer."

Mr Kyei Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
I think the principle is understood, but
certainly, an animal cannot carry on
business so We need to further look at
that place.

Then also, with respect to the fourth
line, instead of saying "medical officer or
veterinary officer" we could say "medical
or veterinary officer" and that would affect
the last one as well. So we have to look at
how to construct it correctly.

[58]

Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, I think
the Hon Minority Leader is perfectly
right. We would leave that to the drafters
to fine time it.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: But what
Question am I putting?

Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, you are
putting the Question that, "after "a person"
we are putting "or animal" and then the
"medical officer" would be "medical or
veterinary officer". That is what we seek
to do.

But the issue about carrying out
business is to allow the drafters to
reconstruct the - to re-look at it to take
care of -- [Interruption]

Dr A. A. Osei: Mr Speaker, no, no.
This is not a matter of leaving the drafters
with the intent of what we want to say. It
is not a matter of just the drafters deciding
that an animal can or cannot carry out
business. There must be some intent and
he must explain to us so we can then
decide if it is possible to leave it to the
draftsperson. But we are saying that an
animal cannot carry out business unless
we have other provisions that we want to
think about. But he cannot just say,
"Leave it to the drafters". It is a serious
matter.

Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, if I can
try to make a further amendment to that,
where we say "A person or animal shall
not reside or enter -- [Interruption]

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
looking at what is contained in (3), I guess
we can leave (3) as it is and have (4), that
is one following after (3).

Mr First Deputy Speaker: A new
sub-clause? We can have a new sub-clause
taking care of the animals?

[59]                                         

Mr Kyei Mensah-Bonsu: Yes, Mr
Speaker. In which case we would not then
include "carry on business", because it is
difficult to have the conjunct when we
have that phraseology "carry on
business", so let us relocate that and we
have a different clause to take care of that.

Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, in that
sense, I would want to stand down clause
2, sub-clause (2).

Mr First Deputy Speaker: The only
amendment you are making therefore is
the "medical and the veterinary officer?

Alhaji Muntaka: Yes, Mr Speaker.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Do you
understand?

Alhaji Muntaka: Yes, MI Speaker.

12.20 p.m.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Minority Leader, we cannot leave it out
alone based on your own argument earlier,
as "medical or veterinary officer". All
right, because it is "persons" so you have
limited it to---

Mr Kyei Mensah-Bonsu: That is why
I am saying you can leave clause 3 as it is,
then we have a new provision to take care
of the animals. In which case we then
insert "veterinary officer" but let me
include "carrying on business -"

Mr First Deputy Speaker: It is the
same rendition except that you will not
include "carrying on business ---"

Mr Kyei Mensah-Bonsu: But rather
insert in place of "medical officer"
"veterinary officer".

Alhaji Muntaka: Thank you, Mr
Speaker, then I take it again, clause 2,
sub-clause 3 - we will maintain what is --

[60]

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Please,
once you are maintaining it, you do not
move anything there. So, if you want to
bring a new sub-clause, take your time, let
us clear it, then you can have the
sub-clause at the end of the clause 3, then
the draftsperson will know Where to put it
as a new sub-clause.

Prof. Ameyaw-Akumfi: MrSpeaker,
as an animal scientist, I get the impression
that pulling humans and animals together
is a source of great confusion. We are in
one sense, looking at the actors, the
veterinary doctors, and so on. Animals
will then be subjects in this whole
enterprise. The vectors; those causing
the diseases and so on. And that is why
we are running into problems with animals
doing business. I think Mr Speaker -

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, help the House. Is it possible
for an animal to be an agent of
communicable disease? This is because
this is the part one - communicable
diseases; is it possible for an animal to be
an agent of communicable diseases?

Prof. Ameyaw-Akumfi: Certainly.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: If the
answer is yes, then we can include
animals.

Prof. Ameyaw-Akumfi: Exactly.And
this is why in the same statement, trying
to bring both the animal and the humans;
it is going to create problems therefore, I
would support the Minority Leader’s view
that we have separate subclauses for
animals and for --

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Yes, we
have all agreed on that.

[61]                                         

Prof. Ameyaw-Akumfi: And also
suggest that we probably take some time
out to look at the animals and the humans
separately. This is because the Hon
Chairman not being an animal scientist is
himself confused about who is what and
who is not.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Are you
with the new rendition dealing exclusively
with the animals now?

Alhaji Muntaka: Yes, Mr Speaker.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Otherwise,
you can defer it and we take the other
amendments then we come back to it.

Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, like you
rightly advised, I was going to take
subclauses 4 and 5, then when I have
taken this one, I will bring the additional
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Very well.

Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, I beg to
move, clause 2, sub-clause (4), line 1,
after "a person" insert "or animal".

Mr Kyei Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
again, the principle is understood but I
would suggest that we have a
construction on these lines. Subsection
3 and indeed, the new one, "do not apply
to a person passing or an animal being
herded along a thoroughfare which is
allowed to remain open", then you remove
to the public.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Does the
animal constitute part of the public?

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Yes, Mr
Speaker, that is why I am saying that, in
that case --

[62]

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Does the
animal constitute part of the public? If
the place is reserved for the public -

Mr Kyei Mensah-Bonsu: No I am
saying that we delete "to the public" so
that we shall have subsections 3 and if
you like 4 -

"do not apply to a person passing
or an animal being herded along a
thoroughfare which is allowed to
remain open".

I think that is a better way to, but given
the problems, maybe after this, we may
have to -

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members we are having some few
challenges, is it not possible to look
closely at this because of the element. I
know we want to hit the ground running
but we must make sure that, in that
process, we do the proper thing.

Dr Kojo Appiah-Kubi: Mr Speaker, I
beg to differ with my Hon Leader because
the emphasis is on the agent which is the
carrier of diseases and not the person who
is herding the animals. Whether it is a
person or animal, they all pass through a
place- So I do not see anything wrong
with this construction so I beg my Leader
to allow it to stand as it is at the moment.
This is because the animal passes through
and the person also passes through, it
does not make any difference.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Please,
the point makes a lot of difference but let
me hear from the Minority Leader.

Mr Kyei Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
the Hon Colleague may address his mind
to the following section.

"A person who contravenes sub-
section 3, commits an offence and it
is liable. . ." 

[63]                                         

[MR KYEI-MENSAH-BONSU]

Indeed, we are not talking about animal
straying. We are talking about they being
herded. That is why I am saying that, if
we are talking about a sanction regime, it
can only apply to human beings. That
was why I offered that suggestion. But if
we are running into problems, Mr Speaker,
maybe, we can take an adjournment, think
through properly and come tomorrow to.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: What is
the mischief that this sub-clause is trying
to cure? They want to be careful in such
a way that because of the fact that you
have a certain kind of disease, you should
not be allowed to pass certain places. That
is the essence. Do we bring animals into
this sub-clause? That is my --

Mr Mathias Puozaa: Mr Speaker, I
think it might be relevant because we can
have a case of a dog with rabies and the
owner should be held responsible.
[Interruption] So the person here or
the owner of the animal should be
charged.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Again, it
makes a lot of sense and that is the point
the Hon Minority Leader is making. The
owner should be charged, but it is not
the clause that creates the offence. The
owner can be somewhere, but what about
where the animal is not being herded.

What happens? This amendment is not
thinking of where the animal is not herded,
it is only talking about when the animal is
herded, and then the owner will be -
What about if it is not being herded, where
the animal is straying?

There are two things we can do, let us
defer it and look at it and if the other area
that are not controversial we can proceed
to make progress or we defer the whole
thing to go and look at it. Those are the

[64]

two options. But if they will have
consequential effect, then the best thing
to do is to look at, since we have
introduced the animal component into the
sub-clause, the whole thing again and
make sure that we do not have challenges.
In any case, it will facilitate the rate at
which we will move. But as at now, we are
having challenges.

Once the Committee did not address
its mind to the animal component in filing
the amendments, it is likely to run through.
So now that this issue has cropped up in
the House and the House has agreed, that
animals should form part, then we must
go back and look at the various sub-
clauses and fine-tune them, harmonize
them and bring them back so that we can
make faster progress.

I know your difficulties and I know your
challenges. That is my view.

12.30 p.m.

Alhaji Muntaka: I am happy Mr
Speaker knows the challenge of the
Committee, The Committee has three Bills
at the same stage, so it is like propelling
three of the --

Mr FirstDeputy Speaker: I am talking
about your personal challenge.
[Laughter] Do not hide behind tho
Committee.

Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, I wish
to thank you sincerely for the suggestion
and wish to collaborate with the
Leadership to maybe, as soon as possible,
try to look at them even though we had
tried looking at them to fine-tune them
maybe before tomorrow -

Mr First Deputy Speaker: I think that
will be better. Get in touch with the Hon
Minority Leader and others that have
expressed interest so far to meet with your
Committee to look at them and fine-tune. I
think we will move at a faster rate if you
do that. But the way it is now, the
Committee itself is under siege.

[65]                                             

Alhaji Muntaka: Rightly so, Mr
Speaker. We thank you sincerely for the
suggestion.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Very Well.
Hon Members, that brings us to the
end of the Consideration Stage anyway.

Mr Gershon K. B. Gbediame: Mr
Speaker, I beg to move, that the House
do now adjourn and reconvene tomorrow
at 10 o'clock in the forenoon.

Mr Osei Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr
Speaker, given the circumstances, I beg
to second the Motion for adjournment
but I will plead with the Committee to really
sit down and clean it up because it is
certainly not in the interest --

Mr First Deputy Speaker: In fact, that
is the order I am going to make. We
thought that today we would do a lot more;

[66]

time is not on our-side. These are not
normal times as I said earlier.

So Chairman of the Committee, I will
suggest that immediately we adjourn, you
get in touch with the members of the
Committee and the Leadership of the
House so that you start working on some
of these amendments for tomorrow.

Alhaji Muntaka: Thank you, Mr
Speaker. In fact, that is exactly what we
-[Interruption.]

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Very well.

Hon Members, Motion moved and
seconded for the adjournment of the
House.

ADJOURNMENT

The House was accordingly
adjourned at 12.35 p.m. till Wednesday,
16th May, 2012 at 10.00 a.m.


