FOURTH SERIES  VOL.76  No.10

WEDNESDAY
8TH FEBRUARY, 2012


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES

OFFICIAL REPORT

WEDNESDAY, 8TH FEBRUARY, 2012

CONTENTS

VOTES AND PROCEEDINGS AND THE OFFICIAL REPORT- [Col. 661]

SECOND READING OF BILLS - - 
Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2012 - [Col. 662]

CONSIDERATION STAGE OP BILLS --- 
i) Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2012 - [Col. 686]
ii) Presidential (Transition) Bill, 2010 -- [Col. 698]

THIRD READING OF BILLS --
Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 20 12 -- [Col. 697]

ADJOURNMENT- [Col. 750]


Correction of errors of substance may be made only on the floor of the House with the permission of
the Speaker. However, correction of typographical or grammatical errors which Members suggest for
the Bound Volumes which will be compiled at the end of the Meeting may be clearly marked in the Daily
Report, and the copy containing the corrections must be received at the Editor's Office, Parliament
House, not later than four clear days after the publication of the Daily Report.

BOUND VOLUMES of Debates (with comprehensive Index) are issued periodically during the Session
There is no fixed subscription rate, but prices will be quoted and standing orders entered on
application. 


Printed by Department of Official Report
Parliament House, Accra
 

[661] 


THE
PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC
OF GHANA

FIRST MEETING, 2012

Wednesday, 8th February, 2012

The House met at 10.50 a.m.

[MADAM SPEAKER IN THE CHAIR]

PRAYERS

Votes and Proceedings and the
Official Report 

Madam Speaker: Hon Members,
Correction of Votes and Proceedings of
Tuesday the 7th of February, 2012.

Page l...12
Mr Joseph B. Aidoo: Mr Speaker, page
12, paragraph 2 - "The following Hon
Members were Present" (iv), my middle
name has been spelt wrongly. It comes
without "e" The "Boahen" is captured as
-o-a-h-e-n.

Madam Speaker: Thank you.

No "e" at the end?

Page 13 –

Mr Osei Kyei-Mensah--Bonsu:
Madam Speaker, sorry to take us back.

Page (9), clause 1 subclause (2); we
deleted ."person elected as President"
and substituted it with "President
elect." "President elect" is spaced,
hyphenated. But we agreed that
wherever we have that construction, we
should have same reflect, which then
would mean that, we would have to go
back to clause 1(1) (b), which should
‘have been on page (8). To begin from
that clause, that is the person elected
as President; that then should also read:
"The President-elect shall appoint ..."

[662]

and it follows like that. Consequentially,
wherever it appears, we have to capture it
in that new construction.

Madam Speaker: Hon. Members, the
Votes and Proceedings of Tuesday, the
7th of February, 2012 as corrected are
adopted as the true record of proceedings.

Hon Leader, shall we move on to the
Commencement of Public Business?

There is no Statement. So we move
on to Public Business, which is item 4.

MOTIONS

Suspension of Standing Order 80(1)
Minister for Local Government and
Rural Development (Mr Samuel Ofosu
Ampofo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move,
that notwithstanding the provisions of
Standing Order 80 (1) which require that
no Motion shall be debated until at least,
forty-eight hours have elapsed between
the date on which notice of the Motion is
given and the date on which the Motion
is moved, the Motion for the Second
Reading of the Local Government
(Amendment) Bill, 2012 may be moved
today.

Mr Dominic Azimbe Azumah: Madam
Speaker, I beg to second the Motion.

Question put and Motion agreed to.

11.00a.m.

BILLS - SECOND READING

Local Government (Amendment)
Bill, 2012 

Minister for Local Government and
Rural Development (Mr Samuel Ofosu
Ampofo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move,
that the Local Government (Amendment)
Bill, 2012 be now read a Second time.




[663] 
[MR AMPOFO]

Madam Speaker, the rationale behind
the Motion is to simply remove sub-
section 4(l) of Section 1 of Act 462 of
1993; It talks about the definition of a
Municipality and it defines ‘Municipality’
as "a single, compact, geographical
settlement".

Madam Speaker, when the
decentralization process started and
Assemblies were created, according to the
law, we had Districts, Municipalities and
Metropolis. A district was defined as a
settlement with a population of over
75,000; that of a municipality had a
population of over 95,000 but must
consist of a single compact geographical
settlement. 

For that matter, the six municipalities
that were created during those times were
all single compact settlements, for
example, Techiman Municipality, Sunyani
Municipality, Tema Municipality. These
municipalities were named after the main
communities around which the districts
were created. .

Along the line, between 2000 and 2009,
a number of municipalities were created
and were not in conformity with this
requirement of single compact
geographical settlement. In order to
remove that obstacle, we are coming up
with this amendment to remove the single
compact settlement and then allow
contiguous settlement areas also to be
considered as municipalities. In that case,
all the other municipalities that have been
created would then fall in line.

Again, it will make the law very
consistent. The determinant factor now
would be the population of the districts,
municipalities and metropolis. Again, the
 aspect will stand, which requires that
other factors such as economic viability,


[664]

geographical contiguity, et cetera are also
considered. If that is done, it would
remove that obstacle which does not fit
into the single compact geographical
areas. That can be problematic because
when it is contested in court and
challenged that those communities are
not single compact settlements, we may
have problems with it. 
 
Madam Speaker, that is the basic
reasons we want to come up with this
amendment, so that we can remove that
aspect.

Thank you 

Question proposed.

Chairman of the Committee (Mr
Dominic A. Azumah): Madam Speaker, I
rise to support the Motion and to
present the Report of the Committee.

Madam Speaker, with your kind
permission, I would want to read the
introduction, the object of the Bill and
background, and its observations with its
recommendations.

But before I do that, Madam Speaker,
at the concluding stage, the Committee
made some recommendations but there
was some omission and the omission is
the proposed amendment to be captured
as part of our Report. The proposed
amendment would read as follows:

"The Local Government Act, 1993
(Act 462) is amended in paragraph
(a)(2) of sub-section 4 of Section 1,
by the deletion of the expression
that the geographical area consists
of a single compact settlement."

That will be the addition to the
concluding part of the Report.

Madam Speaker, I proceed to present
your Report. 




[665] 
[MR AZUMAH] 

1.0 Introduction

The Local Government (Amendment)
Bill, 2012 was laid before Parliament on
Thursday, 2" February, 2012 and referred
to the Committee on Local Government
and Rural Development for consideration
and report. This is in accordance with
articles 103 and 106 of the Constitution of
Ghana and Standing Orders 125 and 181
of the House. 

The Committee was mandated to
determine whether the Bill was of an
urgent nature and could be taken under a
certificate of urgency. The Committee after
deliberating on the issue referred to Order
l 19 and found it necessary to take the Bill
under a certificate of urgency since the it
has not fulfilled the requirement of a
fourteen-day Gazette notification before
being introduced to the House

Moreover, Government intends to lay
a number of Legislative Instruments to
legalise the creation of some new districts
and the elevation of some districts to
Municipal Assemblies status.

Government also considers that the
time at its disposal for the above processes
was rather short and therefore the Bill
should be taken under a certificate of
urgency.


2.0 Deliberations

The Committee met with the Minister
for Local Government and Rural
Development the Deputy Minister, Hon.
Aquinas T. Quansah and officials from the
Ministry. The Committee appreciates their
immense contributions and co-operation.


3.0 References
In discussing the Bill, the Committee
made reference to the following:


[666]
a. The l9l92 Constitution of Ghana.

b. The Standing Order; of the House.

c. The Local Government Act, l993 (Act
462). 


4.0 Object of the Bill

The Bill is seeking to amend the Local
Government Act, 1993 (Act 462) to make‘
it possible for geographical areas which
are-not single compact settlement to be
declared municipalities.

5.0 Background

The Local Government Act, 1993 (Act
462) in providing for the creation of
districts in Section l and
recommendations to be made by the
Electoral Commission to the President in
that regard in subsection (4) of Section 1,
requires that the Electoral Commission in
making recommendations for the
establishment of a municipality has to
consider whether the geographical area
to be declared a municipality consists of
a single compact settlement with a
minimum population of ninety-five
thousand (95,000) people.

This implies that where a geographical
area is a single compact settlement but
does not have a population of ninety-five
thousand (that area cannot be declared a
municipality.

This is compounded where a
geographical area consists of a number
of contiguous single compact settlements
which together have a population far in
excess of the ninety-five thousand
(95,000). Although the single compact
areas are contiguous and together have a
population in excess of ninety-five
thousand (95,000), they do not constitute
a single compact settlement 



[667] 

[MR AZUMAH] 

This requirement is, therefore, an
impediment to the creation of
municipalities and limits the geographical
areas which can be declared
municipalities- It creates a situation where
for effective administration,
infrastructural and other developments,
contiguous compact settlements which
will be best managed as municipalities are
deprived of municipal status. The
provision is thus inimical to the
development and progress of
decentralization in this country.

To remove this obstacle, it is being
proposed that part of subsection (4) of
Section 1 of Act 462 which. requires that
in making recommendations for the
declaration of a municipality by the
Electoral Commission whether the
geographical area is a single compact
settlement should be deleted. 

6.0 Observations

The following observations were made:

6.1 Incompatibility between existing
reality and the law

The Committee was informed that the
amendment is being proposed to create
eight (8) new municipalities and also cater
for eight (8) existing municipalities created
in 2004 and 2007 to streamline issues. If
the amendment is not made, a number of
municipalities created in 2004 and 2007
could be declared null and void.

This is due to the fact that these
municipalities which were created were
not single "compact settlements"; and did
not fulfill the strict legal requirements and
therefore, rendered illegal. Until Section 1
(4) (a) (ii) is amended to bring the law in
harmony with existing reality, these
municipalities will continue to be seen to
be illegal.


[668]

Besides, the successful operations of
the existing municipalities, have
demonstrated that the single compact
settlement requirement is legally
restrictive, sociologically unjustifiable and
developmentally unrealistic.

6.2 Internal inconsistencies in the
scheme of the Legislation

It was also revealed that if the deletion
is effected, the population factor could
be used to define a municipality so as to
be consistent with the definitions of
district and metropolitan areas. Currently,
there are three tiers of Assemblies - the
Metropolitan, Municipal and District The
key and consistent distinction among
them is population size.

The degree of geographical dispersion
is not consistent in the status of
Assemblies in Ghana. While each
metropolis has a minimum population of
two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000)
each Municipal Assembly has ninety-five
thousand (95,000) people and each District
Assembly seventy-five thousand (75,000)
people. Strangely, and against the norm
of consistency, the Municipal Assembly
alone is expected to have in addition to
the population size, a certain distinction
of geographical dispersion which must
constitute a single compact settlement.

This distorts the frame _ of
differentiation and makes the legislative
scheme inconsistent. The amendment will
ensure that all tiers of Assemblies in Ghana
are differentiated by a common
denominator which is population.

7.0 Conclution 

To enable the Electoral Commission
remove the geographical limitation on the
declaration of an area as a municipality,
the Committee recommends to the House
the deletion of subsection (4) of the
Section 1 of the Local Government Act,
l993 (Act 462).

 
[669] 

[MR AZUMAH]

The amendment therefore, proposed is
that the Local Government Act, 1993 (Act
462) is amended in paragraph (a)(2) of sub-
section 4 of Section l, by the deletion of
the expression "that the geographical area
consists of a single compact settlement".

Madam Speaker, I respectfully submit;

11.10a.m .

Madam Speaker: Hon Members,
pursuant to Standing Order 127, a full
debate shall arise on the principle of the
Bill on the basis of the explanatory
memorandum and the Report from the
Committee.

Ranking Member of the Committee
(Mr Maxwell K. Jumah): Madam Speaker,
I rise to support the amendment, but in
doing so I would want to draw attention
to the fact that this amendment is really
not necessary. 

Madam- Speaker, the definition of a
"single compact settlement" depends on
who you are talking to. Let us take Accra
as an example. Accra has so many
neighbourhoods that could easily be
considered as a single compact settlement,
eventually grouped together and made
Accra as one single compact settlement.

Another example is, Adabraka - I
remember when I lived at Mc-Carthy Hill.
From Mc-Carthy Hill to Mallam Junction,
it was all bush; that was a few years ago.
Lam talking about the seventies. I also
remember "Mile 7" where we have the
Pharmaceuticals. Between Achimota and
Mile 7, it was all bush. So it would
depend on who you are talking to. A
forest could be part of a settlement; a river
could be part of a settlement. Those
natural features cannot be considered as
separation of settlements.


[670]

So in defining what a single compact
settlement is, you probably would have
to rely on what is probably accepted by’
technical" people like surveyors,
architects, urban planners and engineers
or use what the layman will consider as
single compact settlement. At any rate, in
practice, depending on whoever is making
the decision, it has been accepted, and it
has not prevented anybody or any
authority from making a district a
municipality.

Madam Speaker, what should rather
happen is that instead of making snap
decisions, we should consider the feeling
or the thinking of residents when it comes
to creating districts or elevating districts
to municipalities. We do not do it. In
fact, in creating districts, 1 do not remember
us making the proper technical and
viability studies. It is always based on
making political points and the illusion
that in creating the districts, you are going
to have development in the area.

Madam Speaker, I wil1 let go as far as
this particular amendment is and wait for
what will happen after that.

'With this, I would want to thank you
for giving me that opportunity."

Madam Speaker: Thank you, Hon
Member for your contribution.

Mr Joseph B. Aidoo (NPP - Amenfi
East): Madam Speaker, in principle, I
support the amendment but then in
practice, I do not support the proposed
amendment, that is, the request to repeal
some aspect of the existing provision.

Madam Speaker, in legislating,
particularly when we are undertaking an
amendment, whatever we do, should have
effect, that is, at the end of the day, the
provision ‘that we arrive at, should have
effect. The moment we repeal the phrase



[671] 

[MR J.B. AIDOO]

which had been indicated, that is, "to
repeal the expression that the geographical
area consists of a single compact
settlement and. . ." Madam Speaker, the
essence of the provision gets lost.

Why am I saying this? The actors of
the original law, I would want to believe
had a rationale for providing this
expression. Immediately it is removed, it
gives a very thin line between what a
district is and what a municipality is
because in that case, we are only dealing
with population sizes.

Madam Speaker, the Hon Minister and
the Chairman of the Committee have
already indicated that when you take a
district, it should have a population of not
less than 75,000. A municipality should
have a population of not less than 95,000.
A metropolis should also not have a
population less than 250,000.

At the moment, we have a number of
districts, many of which have populations
over 95,000. Immediately we remove this
phrase, "the single compact settlement",
it means, all those districts with
populations of over 95,000, automatically,
become municipalities. If we are going
strictly by the definition which is now
underway, that is What we will arrive at

Madam Speaker: But it is not
automatic, anyway. It will have to go
through processes.

11.20a.m. 

Mr J. B. Aidoo: Madam Speaker, but
the point I am making is, what they are
saying is that, when the Electoral
Commission is recommending to the
President for a municipality to be created,
that area in question should have a
population of not less than 95,000. And I
am saying that we have a number of


[672]

settlements that if you put them together,
will have the 95,00 population threshold
and this will introduce an ambiguity in the
existing provision. But we know that
when you are introducing any law, there
should be no ambiguity. 

Madam Speaker, _the Hon Minister
mentioned that the previous
Administration created certain
municipalities which did not qualify. But
the point is that, those municipalities were
created with the view to taking the
nucleus of the municipalities and the
nucleus of those areas were selected
based on certain factors.

Madam Speaker, we know when you-
take a place like Cape Coast, from the
colonial era, it had been a very important
administrative capital. Take for instance,
its education. It is an area which by itself
is also a single compact settlement and
can constitute a municipality. But if the
population of Cape Coast is not up to
95,000, then you look for other settlements
around to join to make it a municipality,
with Cape Coast being the nucleus of that
municipality.

The point I am trying to make is that,
we can identify a number of such nuclei,
that is, settlements which have nuclei,
for instance, Tarkwa. Tarkwa is an old
mining town. If you take Obuasi, it is an
old mining town. Obuasi can qualify to
become a municipality, but then, given its
size or population alone, it may not qualify
as a municipality because of population
size.

Then we have to bring in the distinct
geographical expression that the single
compactness of Obuasi, yes, you add the
population which it cannot get, but then
you have to select a number of settlements
around Obuasi, add to Obuasi to get the
95,000 which Will qualify it to become a
municipality. 




[673] 
[MR B. AIDOO]

I have a view that instead of removing
the expression, "a single compact
settlement", we should retain it to give
essence and then to give a clear
expression or identity of municipality.
With that identity, once an area has a
nucleus and we bring on board
settlements around which would make it
get the 95,000 population, that area can
be considered as a municipality.

In that case, there will be no ambiguity
in the provision and it will also give
legality to already established
municipalities which the Hon Minister is
indicating that they were established
without following the proper legal
procedure.

If that is the essence of this amendment,
then to remove that doubt, by mere repeal
of the expression "single compact
settlement", Madam Speaker, I am afraid
the provision will lose its essence as a
municipality. 

We have various sizes of settlements,
we have hamlets, villages, towns, urban,
rural, municipality, metropolis and we even
have megapolis, All these have their own
definitions and we have to be very careful
in the way we craft a definition for a
municipality Without losing its
geographical expression. If we do that, I
am afraid, what the original architects of
this particular law intended will be lost

With this, Madam Speaker, I support
the amendment in principle but removing
/the phrase from it, I believe, is not the
best way. We must retain it and rather
broaden the existing provision to capture
other aspects, so that all those areas which
qualify to be municipalities can then be
taken on board.

Madam Speaker: Thank you, Hon
Member.



[674]
Mr Joseph Yieleh Chireh (NDC -
Wa West): Madam Speaker, I support this
amendment and it is important in several
ways.

When we make a law in this country, I
mean in this House, we expect the
Judiciary to interpret the words that we
use to mean something. So, if you say
single and compact, it must be given one
meaning. Therefore, if you want to create
a municipality like Techiman with
Techiman North as part of that
municipality, it is one rural area attached
to an urban or a compact urban area called
Techiman.

Of course, this amendment now makes
any other settlements that are contiguous
with Techiman to be part of the
municipality. If you do not do that, it
means, strictly speaking, anybody who
takes the case to court will have a case
and that is why this amendment should
even be said to be long overdue.

It is recognizing that; first of all, We do
not plan as in other places; we have
settlements springing up around and
therefore, to be able to capture all this,
this contiguous arrangement that we are
talking about in terms of this particular
amendment is important.

I also believe that it is for us to tidy up;
otherwise, if we say we should not make
any distinction between a Municipal
Assembly and Metropolitan Assembly,
just because Accra is large and it is
sprawling, that is not a fair thing to do.

I believe that all of us should vote for
this Motion and make sure that we are
consistent. Nobody is raising the issue
backwards but it is important for us to be
consistent with the law and be clear in
what we ask the Judiciary to interpret in
case somebody wants to test it.

Finally, I believe that the amendment
that the Hon Chairman is proposing is
appropriate, in the sense that instead of


[675]

[MR CHIREH]

the word "repeal", it should be "deletion
of the expression" This is because repeals
normally - And drafting should be
about Acts and other legislations but this
is about a phrase within a law and that is
why I will recommend that instead of the
repeal of that expression, it should be the
deletion of that expression.

I urge all Hon Colleagues to vote for
the Motion. 

Thank you, very much. 

Madam Speaker: Thank you, Hon
Member.

Yes, Hon Papa Owusu-Ankornah. 
Papa Owusu-Ankomah (NPP --
Sekondi): Thank you very much, Madam
Speaker, for the opportunity to contribute
to this debate.

The object of the Bill, we are told, is to
amend the Local Government Act,
1993 (Act 462) to enable geographical
areas which are not single compact
settlements to be declared municipalities.
I believe the object is in the right direction.

However, is it the intention to make all
contiguous geographical areas
irrespective of historical, political or so,
history to be made municipalities provided
it can get the necessary numbers‘? I do
not believe so. This is because it is
possible to have districts whose sizes may
be over 95,000 but which may not
necessarily be deemed to be given
municipal status. I think we should try
and preserve this

I am sure the Hon Minister for Local
Government and Rural Development
agrees with me because if it is just to make
contiguous, then any group of
contiguous settlements with a population
of 95,000 may be made. A group of
hamlets may be made a municipality but
that should not be the essence.
[676]

That is Why I believe the arguments
raised by the Hon Member for Amenfi East
(Mr Joseph B. Aidoo) ought to be
considered because I know that for
instance, the Hon Member for Ketu North
(Mr James Klutse Avedzi), if he decides
to add some settlements to Ketu North
to get 95,000, it may not be practical to
make it a municipality.

However, if for instance, you Want to
create Aflao, get an Aflao municipality, it
may be possible to get some other
settlements to come together. Why? It is
because Aflao is a major commercial
centre, a border town.

You talk about Techiman. Historically,
Techiman has been a major trading centre.
Historically, you talk about Axim. Axim
had a District Commissioner long even
before independence. So I am saying that,
while I agree in principle to the deletion of
that expression, we should not also by
that amendment create a situation where
you can put together small hamlets
spanning an area of 50 or 60 kilometres
and say it is a municipality. If it is done
that Way, then municipality loses its
essence.

So like earlier contributors, I believe
that with this amendment, the principle is
right but when it comes to the
Consideration Stage, probably, We must
give salt to the arguments that have been
raised earlier.
Thank you, Madam Speaker.
11.30a.m.

Alhaji Abdul-Rashid Pelpuo (NDC --
Wa Central): Madam Speaker, I also rise
to support the Motion and to suggest that
this is a very important amendment that,
according to the Report before us, will
correct an earlier decision taken between
2004 and 2007 when eight municipalities
without recourse to the- existing legal
flame.


[677]
[ALHAJI PELPUO]

Madam Speaker, this will also allow us
to relief ourselves of the restriction that
only suggests that areas that are single
compact areas with population of 95,000
are the ones that can only be considered
for a municipality. It allows for decision to
be made in accordance with the
development trends and the country at a
point in time.

Madam Speaker, I suggest that we take
this amendment seriously and support it
and ensure that we correct the earlier
mistake that was made and make it easy
for the Hon Minister and Government of
the day to see that a development trend
that is occurring in a particular region can
be arrested.

I say so because it is all about ensuring
that people are taken care of and that we
respond to the requirement of the
Constitution that allows for equilibrium
development across board. _So -when
people are growing in population and are
also yearning for development in a
direction that we will need, Madam
Speaker, we can easily make recourse to
the law and respond to their development
needs without necessarily being restricted
by the present law.

Madam Speaker, with this brief note, I
would want to support the Motion and
call on Hon Members to support it as well.

Madam Speaker: Thank you Hon
Member. 

Hon Members, it is time to put the
Question now –

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu - rose -
Madam Speaker: Hon Minority Leader,
were you going to make a contribution?

[678]

Minority Leader Mr (Osei Kyei~
Mensah-Bonsu): Madam Speaker, I am
sorry. I saw the Hon Member for Juabuso,
so I thought you were going to call him.
That was why I did not get up. However,
I would also want to make some
contribution here on this amendment.

Madam Speaker, the Bill before us is
calling for an amendment to paragraph (a)
(ii) of subsection (4) of Section I of Act
462. Madam Speaker, we are told that
reference is being made to something, a
construction, or a phrase in the Local
Government Act, 1993 (Act 462) and it
reads as follows "that the geographical
area consists of a single compact
settlement and". That is what is intended
to be deleted.

Madam Speaker, I have combed
through the Act, there is no word like
"settlement." as appears in this Bill in the
Act. So I do not know what is being
referred to- So if the Hon Minister can
educate us. There is no word like that in
Act 462. So what are they referring to?
Madam Speaker, I would not want to
proceed until I hear from the Hon Minister

Madam Speaker: I am not following. You
are saying that the Bill does not quote
the proper repeal? Is that it, Hon Minority
Leader? 

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Madam
Speaker, they are referring to –

Madam Speaker: Yes, Act 462 –

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Madam
Speaker, I have seen it, there is no word
like that there. 

Madam Speaker: Hon Member, the
Act is 462. Is it not it?

Mr Klyei-Mensah-Bonsu: That is so,
Madam Speaker.




[683] [MR KYEI-MENSAH-BONSU]

So Madam Speaker, like Pontius Pilate,
I may want to Wash my hands off this
matter. [Interruptions]

Madam Speaker: Thank you for your
Contribution.

Let us have one more and let us move
on. 

11.50a.m. 

Attorney-General and Minister for
Justice (Dr Benjamin Kunbuor): Madam
Speaker, under normal circumstances, I
have seen the consensus that has been
built around this particular amendment.
But once very, very serious legal
questions have been raised by the Hon
Minority Leader, it is important that, for
the richness of our Official Report, we are
able to present some cogent legal
arguments not only for this House but
also because of the years of
misinterpretation of these particular
articles, that is, article 241(1) to (3) and it
is to be made very, very clear, so that we
can all understand it

l appreciate exactly the correctness of
the position the Hon Minority Leader
indicated. If you do not isolate one clause
of a constitutional provision, you are likely
not to understand the import. There are
three clauses in article 241; the first clause
maintains all existing districts before the
coming into force of the Constitution.

The next logical step is that, does the
Constitution envisage that new districts
can been created by reconstitution or by
re-demarcation? So clause 2 immediately
provides how future additional
constituencies or reconstitution and
demarcation has to be done and that is
why it directs that, that has to be done
and provided for by Parliament. That has
been done already by Parliament and that
is Act 462. 


[684]

This is the sequence of how we should
interpret that particular article and
respectfully, Madam Speaker, this matter
has been pronounced on and analysed
sufficiently by no other court than the
Supreme Court of the country in the
Biakoye case.

In fact, for the first time, the Supreme
Court has set out all the parameters and
constitutional issues that are involved in
the President passing the Executive
Instruments (E.I.), in the Minister laying
the Legislative Instruments (L.L.) - all are
emanating from article 241 of the
Constitution. If you were to have the
absurd situation in which you are saying
that every district that has to be created,
is by an Act of Parliament, we have never,
never had an Act of Parliament that has
created a district. 

All our districts we have under the 1992
Constitution have been created by E.I.s
and L.I.s. If we Were to lean to the
interpretation that We should now be
creating them by Acts of Parliament, then
it means automatically, all the districts
since 1993 till 2007 are null and void.

I do not intend that the framers of the
Constitution Wanted to create that type
of situation but I am particularly happy
that the Hon Minority Leader has seen
through this and has raised this and this
is the legal position on these matters -
[Interruption.]

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu -- rose –

Madam Speaker: I thought you had 4
washed your hands em [Laughter]
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Madam
Speaker, unfortunately not, and it cannot
be said that this situation is an absurdity
at all. [Inz‘errupti0n.] It cannot be said
that this situation is an absurdity.




[685] 

Dr Kunbuor: I did not mean that the
statement was an absurdity. I said, were
we to lean to an interpretation, that
districts now have to be created by Acts
of Parliament, it will lead to an absurdity.
This is because we have always created
our districts by L.I.s. [Interruption] Yes.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Madam
Speaker, if a process is unconstitutional,
it cannot be said that because it has been
done 100 times already, it legitimises the
situation. It will be very convoluted,
Madam Speaker, if we go on that path.

I just raised the matter and I thank the
Attorney-General and Minister for Justice
for venturing some explanation. I do not
think that I am convinced and persuaded
at all by what has been said. But as I said,
I have washed my hands off it. However,
for the time being, Madam Speaker, I am
Pontius Pilate. [Laughter]

Madam Speaker: Hon Members, I
think this is the end of the debate. Can I
put the Question now? [Pause.]

Question put and Motion agreed to.

'The Local Government (Amendment)
Bill, 2012 was duly read a Second time.

Madam Speaker: Yes, shall we move
to item number (6) then, Hon Minister?
Suspension of Standing Order 128(1) .
Mr Samuel Ofosu Ampofoz Madam
Speaker, I beg to move, that
notwithstanding the provisions of
Standing Order 128 (.1) which require that
When a Bill has been read a Second time,
it shall pass through a Consideration
Stage, which shall not be taken until at
least, forty-eight hours have elapsed, the
Consideration Stage of the Local
Government (Amendment) Bill, 2012 may
be taken today.


[686]

Mr Dominic A. Azumah: Madam
Speaker, I beg to second the Motion.

Question put and Motion agreed to.

Resolved accordingly.

BILLS - CONSIDERATION STAGE

Local Government (Amendment)
Bill, 2012

Section 1 of Act 462 amended. 

Chairman of the Committee (Mr
Dominic A. Azumah): Madam Speaker, l
beg to move, -that the Local Government
Act,1993, (Act 462) is amended in
paragraph A2 of subsection 4 of section 1
by the deletion of the expression "that
the geographical area consists of a single
compact settlement"; insert "settlement"
and "the repeal" is deleted to read --
"deletion of the expression".

Mr William Ofori Boafo Madam
Speaker, I rise to support the amendment
proposed by the Chairman.

Madam Speaker, if you look at the
memorandum to the Bill, page (1), the last
paragraph, reference to the deletion is
made in the last line. If you look at page
(2) of the Memorandum also, the
expression "deleting" is equally repeated
in line (2) of that paragraph.

Madam Speaker, the purpose of the
Memorandum is to seek to delete and not
to repeal.

Madam Speaker, the second reason is
that, we are all familiar with the fact that
we use the word "repeal" when we are
dealing with substantive issues like the
repeal of Acts of Parliament and sections
of the Act, but when we come to
expressions within the Bill or the Act, we
normally use "deletion".

Madam Speaker, I support the
amendment.



[687] 

Mr Joseph B. Aidoo - rose ---

Madam Speaker: Hon Member, are
you standing? Do you want to make a
contribution?

12.00 noon

Mr J. B. Aidoo: Yes Madam Speaker, I
rise to oppose the amendment and to
propose an alternative amendment.

Madam Speaker, if we go by the
amendment that had been proposed by
the Chairman, the provision will lose its
essence. I have already indicated that.
My proposed amendment is this, that
section 4 (a) (ii); we delete the entire
provision there and substitute with- and
with your kind indulgence, I beg to read:

"A municipality, that there is a
minimum of 95,000 people and that
the nucleus of the municipality shall
consist of a single -compact
settlement which is known for
cultural, educational, economic or
political purpose".

Madam Speaker, with this provision, it
will satisfy all municipalities that have
some historical significance in terms of
their economic purposes, their educational
purposes and their cultural purposes.
Madam Speaker, if you take Axim as the
Hon Member for Sekondi indicated, we
know historically, was a very important
mechanised port If you take Techiman,
we know is -- because of - The
importance of Techiman lies in its market,
that is, weekly market.

Madam Speaker, if you take Obuasi as
I indicated, it is an old mining town and
of course, every municipality has a
nucleus, every municipality should have
an urbanness, it should have an urban
identity. So the urban identity plus its
pre-urban area –

Madam Speaker: Hon Member, there
was a first amendment; we did not finish
with it. That is another amendment.

Mr J. B. Aidoo: Madam Speaker, rightly
so. I am proposing the first one and then
introducing –

Madam Speaker: I thought we should
put the Question on the first amendment
to see whether it is agreed to and then
you move again. This is because your
amendment is quite different from what
was proposed.

Mr J. B. Aidoo: Madam Speaker, in
that case, my amendment which is coming
second would be taken first for voting and
if it is lost, then we take the original
amendment. That is why –

Madam Speaker: We normally take it
as it comes. Is it not it?

Mr J. B. Aidoo: No! We take the last
one and if they are even four, you take the
last one and then –

Madam Speaker: How will I know?
They come - when he came in, you did
not suggest he was going to make an
amendment. So he has suggested
amendment and supported it and I am
saying, we have to decide whether it is
agreed to or disagreed to. Then your
amendment will come in. This is because
at that stage, we did not know you were
going to also- This will happen if there
are so many amendments listed, and when
we come here, knowing some
amendments. Is it not it?

Mr J.B. Aidoo: Madam Speaker,at the
Consideration Stage, the alternative
amendments will have to be considered.
Otherwise, if you take the original
amendment and it is passed, it means that
all other amendments have been lost in
the process. So, if any Hon Member has
an alternative amendment, it should be
brought for Consideration first before




[689] 


[MR J. B. AIDOO]

the original amendment is taken. Before
the vote on the original amendment
comes, any alternative amendment will
have to be considered first.

Alhaji Haruna Iddrisu: Madam
Speaker, thank you very much.

I rise to support the Motion well ably
tabled by the Chairman of the Committee
on Local Government. And in doing so,
to oppose the alternate amendment that
has been proposed by the Hon Member
for Amenfi East and Madam Speaker to
persuade him to step the proposed
amendment down for us to make progress.

Madam Speaker, the issue to which he
is speaking, whether nucleus, of a
municipality or population of 95,000 or
75,000, are matters that a Legislative
Instrument by the Hon Minister will
address in the future. We should get this
amendment through. So I will persuade
him that these matters and the concerns
he has raised can legitimately be
addressed when the Hon Minister is
exercising, his mandate under the Local
Government Act, in bringing an L.I. to
define.

Madam Speaker, the truth is, we can
never compare our District Assemblies to
look unique and be the same. You cannot
compare Tema Municipal Assembly to
maybe, Bongo, neither can you compare
Takoradi nor Accra Metropolitan
Assembly to Sefwi Assembly. Madam
Speaker, these are matters that a
Legislative Instrument will address. I,
therefore, oppose his amendment but I
will plead with him that, for purpose of
making progress, he should step it down
and let us get this amendment through.

I thank you. I


[690]

Madam Speaker: Continue, because
the two are the same. We will put the
Questions on the two later on.

Your amendment is to delete?

Mr J. B. Aidoo: My amendment is to
delete the entire provision in (ii) and then
substitute with the following:

"A municipality, that there is a
minimum of 95 ,0O0 people and that
the nucleus of the municipality shall
consist of a single compact
" settlement which is known for
cultural, educational, economic or
political purpose".

Madam Speaker, I am saying that with
this amendment, it will satisfy the
population threshold of 95 ,000 and at the
same time, give identity to the municipality.
But if you take the original amendment
that had been proposed by the Chairman
and the Hon Minister, the identity of the
municipality would be lost; once you
remove the single compact settlement, it
would be lost. And I have also indicated
that municipalities should have urban
identity.

The urban nucleus plus its periphery,
that is the pre-urban area together, then it
becomes the single compact settlement.
Then you can bring in other settlements
for it to get the population threshold of
95 ,O0O. And I would want to believe that
my proposed amendment satisfies the
rationale behind the originators of this
particular law. The moment you remove
the single compact settlement as they are
trying to do, Madam Speaker, that
rationale will be lost and it will even
introduce ambiguity.

In essence, if you have so many
hamlets, for instance, in Lawra, so many
hamlets put together and you get 95,000
people and then you say it is a
municipality, it is wrong. Hamlets which



[691] 

[MRJ.B. AIDOO]

do not have any urban identity cannot
constitute a municipality. Hamlets or
farmstead or villages, like in Lawra -
[Laughter] 

Madam Speaker, every municipality
should have an urban - because if you
look at the definition bra municipality, it
is just an urban administrative unit. Of
course, in what we are trying to do, the
geographical area being defined as a
municipality may not necessarily have
95,000 but there should be that single
compactness to give it that urban identity
and then we can add other settlements to
it

Therefore, my proposition is that, the
single compact sphere is the nucleus and
then it should have some economic
purpose, it should have some cultural
purpose; it can be an educational purpose
like Cape Coast. And I think, Madam
Speaker, in that case, we will be satisfying
the provision of this particular
amendment we are seeking to do.

l2.10p.m.

Mr Joseph Y. Chireh: Madam
Speaker, in creating a municipality, you
would also still have sub-divisions --you
have urban councils within the
municipality. Therefore, what he is talking
about, you cannot just go and collect
settlements and create a municipality. The
urbanness is the one that defines the
municipality. But in our p'a11i'cular case,
you have a town or an urban area, and
there are very close to that urban area or
farfaway, similar settlements which are
growing towards becoming a one big
settlement by the development and that
is what we are talking about.


[692]

So, it is not again proper for us to begin
to introduce culture, economic activity
into a historical -- Indeed, urban areas
and municipalities are so spontaneously
being created that all kinds of cultures can
be there. Now, if you create such a
municipality, who is going to interpret
whether you have conformed to the
cultural needs, the economic needs or the
definition? Which court is going to do
that?

So please, let us reject this further
amendment and take the original one
proposed by the Chairman of the
Committee.

Dr Kunbuor: Madam Speaker, I see
the significance of the amendment that
the Hon Member is bringing inasmuch as
it is going to give us a number of indicators
in. the decentralization programme. But
why I would plead with the Hon Member
to discard the amendment is that, we are
dealing first with an Act of Parliament. If
you ask the draftspersons, they would tell
you very clearly that, as you begin to
choose words for a provision in a
legislation, you should anticipate that it
is likely to be a subject of interpretation.
The many more fluid and highly
contestable words that you introduce into
a provision, the more interpretational
challenges for the future.

Just here, we had a difficulty in
ascertaining what exactly is a single
compact settlement. I can assure you that
there are as different meanings of what
constitutes culture as different people
who are telling their stories on culture.
What is economic and what is not
economic is another tall order and it is
dangerous to go and put these matters in
an Act of Parliament that is likely to come
for interpretation.





[693]


[DR KUNBUOR]

But the place I see these indications
coming as Hon Haruna Iddrisu said, is to
find some expression in them in the
appropriate Legislative Instrument. If you
see the requirements that you would be
raising to give the identity, the identity
would be coming in the naming and the
Constitution by L.I. of the particular
municipality that is concerned.

That is why I think that we should leave
it as broadly as it is, which does not
defeat the interest that we want to
introduce but it can be handled in
subsequent subsidiary legislations. Just
for no other reason but as a professional
lawyer, I know the difficulties of loading
provisions with -words whose
interpretation can be very problematic.

Mr Benito Owusu-Bio: Madam
Speaker, I rise to support the Hon Member
for Amenfi East, Mr Joseph Aidoo’s
amendment that he has proposed.

Madam Speaker, he is asking that we
amend the provision from the Ministry to
stand as a municipality that there is a
minimum of 95,000 people and that the
nucleus of the municipality shall consist
of a single compact settlement which is
known for cultural, educational, economic
or political purposes.

Yes, Madam Speaker, I wish to supp oit
this. Why I am saying this is because, as
the law stands now, there are single
compact settlements which on their own
have a population of more than 95,000
people. They already have that and these
have not been upgraded to municipalities.
Madam Speaker, so I do not see why we
would have any problem with having it
being amended as the Hon Member is
asking us to do.

So Madam Speaker, on that note, I end
here.


[694]

Mrs Akosua Frema Osiei-Opare:
Madam Speaker, I rise to support the
further amendment proposed by the Hon
Member for Amenfi East.

Madam Speaker, we should not leave
things in a nebulous fashion. What is the
difference between a district and a
municipality? There must be some clarity
and we have been given guidance in the
original law.

Therefore, this amendment should seek
to take into consideration the original
intent plus other developments that we
all recognise; such that we are saying that
we should not simply look at the 95,000
as the yardstick but looking at the totality
of a municipality made up of ~a single
compact area plus other satellite areas that
culturally, educationally or politically can
constitute a municipality.

Ithink this is avery important provision
and we must be able to distinguish which
is a municipality and which is a district.
We must be able - otherwise, When we
come to East Legon, I will demand a
municipality. Is there any boundaries that
guide the authorities who are supposed
to propose municipalities or districts that
they can use? What this law should not
do is to make it an open-ended thing such
that anywhere, _any place becomes a
municipality. Then let us delete those
clauses and let us decide - today, if we
want to call Abokyiman a municipality, I
would be very happy to propose that idea.

But if we are Sitting here to make a law
in relation to the Constitution, let us make
it in such a way that there is guidance for
the authorities to know Where a
municipality can be created or where it
cannot.

I rest my case, Madam Speaker.

Madam Speaker: Let us have one last
contributor before I put the Question.



[695] 

Alhaji AbduI-Rashid Pelpuo: Madam
Speaker, it is easy to appreciate where my
Hon Friend from Amenfi East is coming
from. The truth is that, more and more, we
are in a country that is becoming more
cosmopolitan. Cosmopolitan, meaning
that we have people coming from all over
the world, all over the country with
different kinds of cultures and attitudes
and identity and all those who come to
settle at a point and who want
development.

Now, supposing you have such a
cosmopolitan area with 100,000 people
without a nucleus cultural identity as he
is talking about. Is he saying there
cannot be a municipality?

So Madam Speaker, I think that the
heart of this amendment is about
extending development to a people. It is
about ensuring that when people are
together and have reached a certain
number, we can bring development to
them. It is not about education, it is not
about culture, it is not about any other
identity he is talking about. We are talking
about numbers and we are talking about
geographical contiguity. 

So I think that the amendment can come
as.Hon Haruna Iddrisu has said, when we
come to Legislative Instruments, spelling
out specific areas where we would Want a
decision to be made but not in an Act
which is talking of a general nature and
specifying kinds of developments we
want to see happen in our particular –

So, Madam Speaker, I would want to
call on my Friends to support the Motion,
so that we do not spend much more time
on this debate.

Some Hon Members --rose –

Madam Speaker: I thought I said last
contributor? We are spending too much
time. Two hundred and thirty people can
speak today and we will have no work
done. I am apportioning time.


[696]

Hon Members, let us move on. We
have had two amendments to the clause;
let us deal with the second amendment
first.

The second amendment says, to put
in place of the first amendment, that is, a
municipality, that there is a minimum of
95,000 people and that the nucleus of the
municipality shall consist of a single
compact settlement, which is known for
cultural, educational, economic and
political purpose. I will put the Question
on that first -- that is the second
amendment.

Like I said, the amendment is that we
should delete what is in the Bill before us
and replace it with this new amendment
which I have just read.

Question put and amendment
negatived.

12.20p.m

Madam Speaker: The amendment is
negatived, which takes us to the first
amendment contained in the Bill before
us. 

Question put and amendment agreed
to. 

Clause l as amended ordered to stand
part of the Bill.

Long Title ordered to stand part of the
Bill. 

Madam Speaker: This ends the
Consideration Stage of the Local
Government (Amendment) Bill, 2012.

Yes, shall we move on then to Motion
number 8? 

Hon Minister?




[697] 

Suspension of Standing Order 131(1)

Mr Samuel 0. Ampofo: Madam
Speaker, I beg to move, that
notwithstanding the provisions of
Standing Order 13 1(1), which require that
when a Bill has passed through the
Consideration Stage, the Third Reading
thereof shall not be taken until at least,
twenty-four hours have elapsed, the
Motion for the Third Reading of the Lo cal
Government (Amendment) Bill, 2012 may
be moved today. 

Mr Dominic A. Azumah: Madam
Speaker, I beg to second the Motion.

Question put and Motion agreed to.

Resolved accordingly.

BILLS - THIRD READING

The Local Government (Amendment)
Bill, 2012 -read the Third time and passed
-- [Minister for Local Government and
Rural Development].

Mr Avoka: Madam Speaker, I thank all
Hon Colleagues for the support and co-
operation in taking this ‘amendment Bill
through today.

Madam Speaker, we can go to item
number 10 on the Order Paper. We are still
at the Consideration Stage of the
Presidential (Transition) Bill, 2010.

Madam Speaker: Hon Members, the
Hon First Deputy Speaker will take the
Chair and continue with the
Consideration Stage of the Presidential
(Transition) Bill, 2010. 

12.28 P.M. –

[MR FIRST DEPUTY SPEAKER IN THE
CHAIR] – 



[698]

BILLS -CONSIDERATION STAGE

Presidential (Transition) Bill, 2010

[Resumption of debate from O1-02-12]

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, Presidential (Transition) Bill,
2010 at the Consideration Stage.

Clause 4 – Sub- committees

Chairman of the Committee (Mr
Emmanuel K. Bandua): Mr Speaker, I beg
to move, clause 4, subclause (1), line 1,
delete "out of" and insert "from among".

Mr Speaker, this is a better rendition.
12.30p.m

Alhaji Haruna Iddrisu:Mr Speaker, I
support the Chairman’s amendment, but I
would seek your leave that apart from the
insertion of "from among", "members of
the team", in my view, should not be --
We cannot have "the team shall establish
from among members of the team". You
have already said "team" . So if he has no
objection, it should read:

"The team shall establish from
among its members –

(a) an inauguration sub-committee ……”

Mr First Deputy Speaker: What is
the difference between yours and the
Chairman’s, Hon Minister? 

Alhaji H. Iddrisu: Mr Speaker, mine is
elegance. How can we say:

"The team shall establish from
among members of the team"?

I have some difficulty with it.

Mr Chireh: Mr Speaker, the correct
thing is what the Hon Chairman said. It is
because in drafting," we do not use "its"
or "yours" or something. We have to
repeat what we mean. And that means
from that team, "its members" is not



[699] 

[MR CHIREH]

appropriate. That is why it has been
repeated and I think that the amendment
of the Hon Chairman should be supported.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Minister, do you still insist on your
amendment?

Alhaji H. Iddrisu: Not really. I can
abandon it. But I know that even as a
practice here, we normally would have
created the sub-committees before
identifying them. "The team shall establish
such sub-committees. . ." as art of the
introductory word. But I would abandon
mine and go with the Hon Chairman’s.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Minority Leader, the Hon Minister says
we should have set up sub-committees or
the sub-teams, to make it clearer before
becoming What do you say to that? I
just want your input before I put the
Question. 

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
we are talking about sub-committees of
the team. We must establish the team, the
functions and the schedule for the team.
And we are now into the establishment of
sub-committees. I think it is appropriate
the Way it has been captured. l) thought
when he got up, because he is speaking
about elegance, we could have a
construction like this:

"The team shall establish from
among members .. ."

And we do not repeat the team. But I
think it is elegant and more concise the
Way it has been structured; so we can go
with that. 

Mr Chireh: Mr Speaker, in order not
to have a doubt about what-he said earlier,
in providing for- In fact, this is why the
first line of this clause says: "There shall
be. . ." It means that is the enabling
provision making room for the sub-
committees. So there should not be any
problem of having to put it earlier. That is
the only thing I wanted to explain.

Question put and amendment agreed
to
[700]

Mr Bandua: Mr Speaker, I beg to move,
clause 4 subclause (1), paragraph (a),
line 4, after "office" insert "by the person
elected as President and the person
elected as Vice-President" and before
"January" insert "of". 

In the case of the first amendment, this
is necessary because the oath of office is
taken by both the President and the Vice
President. So there is the need for us to
bring in the two here. And before
"Parliament on the 7th of January," I think
it is a better rendition, Mr Speaker.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Chairman,
how would the new rendition be like?
Mr Bandua: Let me take the new
rendition –

"An inauguration sub-committee
which shall be responsible for the
organisation of the inauguration of
the person elected as President into
office and for the taking of oath of
office by the person elected as
President and the person elected as
Vice President before Parliament on
the 7th of January."

Mr Speaker, that is how it should read.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsuz Mr Speaker,
by way of further improvement, we agreed
yesterday that the person elected as
President should now read: "the
President-elect". The same description
should affect the "Vice President. So it
should read: "Vice President elect”

Mr Bandua: I think We agreed that it
should be consequential. So throughout
the Bill, anywhere we have "the person
elected as President," it should be
"President-elect." That one has been
agreed on. So I think the draftspersons
may have to take note of that. I support
what he has just said.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, which is a better rendition? Is
it "President-elect" or "person elected as
President? I am looking at certain
consequential actions that may happen.





[701] 

Alhaji H. Iddrisu: Mr Speaker, I would
go for "President-elect". 

Mr Avokaz Mr Speaker, yesterday,
after a lengthy debate on this subject, we
agreed on the rendition of "President-
elect". 

Alhaji H. Iddrisu: Mr Speaker, I have
just been looking at page 185 of the
abridged version of the 1992
Constitution, to guide me into accepting
that oaths - before We put the Question
on that pardcular clause. Page 185, in
particular, the Second Schedule - forms
of oath - I do not see an "s" there; But
in our case, we are importing "oaths". 

Mr First Deputy Speaker: What
particular article are you referring to? 

Alhaji H. Iddrisu: lam sure under the
Miscellaneous Provisions, section –

Mr First Deputy Speaker: The
Miscellaneous Provisions should have an
article. What article of the Constitution?
1992 are you referring to? 

Alhaji H. Iddrisu: I would convey
that shortly, Mr Speaker. But mine is with
the spelling and the inclusion of "s" as in
"oaths".

Mr Chireh: Mr Speaker, we are talking
about "oaths" here. This is because on
that day the President is taking two
different oaths. The official oath, oath of
secrecy and anybody who is taking -
There are oaths. I do not think there is
any problem about having a plural form
of it.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, the point raised by the Hon
Minister for Communications is whether
it should be "path" or "oaths".

Hon Minister, what does the 1992
Constitution say?


[702]

12.40p.m.

Alhaji H. Iddrisu: Mr Speaker, it is not
actually a specific - it is just the
Second Schedule to the Constitution -
"Forms of Oath" - It says the "Oath of
Allegiance, Presidential Oath, the Oath of
the Vice President, the Judicial Oath and
others."

Mr Avoka: Mr Speaker, it is "Oath"
here because it refers to the "forms" -
"Forms of Oath". But when we come to
the Bill that we are dealing with, there are
several oaths that the President will take,
like the Hon Member for Wa West is trying
to lead us. I think that the "oaths" here
will suffice; rather than "oath".

Mr Chireh: Mr Speaker, you know that
in law making, one oath represents several
oaths. So we can go along with the
"oath" Without the "'s"; but it would also
include the plural – 

Mr First Deputy Speaker: The single
includes the plural; that is the point you
are making?

Mr Chireh: Yes. So I revert to what
he said earlier.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
we are referring to more than one
personality - different oaths and more
than one personality. Do not forget we
are including the Vice President-elect. So
I believe the "oaths" in this context would
be more appropriate.

Mrs Frema Os ei-O pare - rose –

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Very well.
Yes, Hon Member for Ayawaso-West
Wuogon, you have the floor.

Mrs Osei-Opare: Mr Speaker, I tend
to support the use of the word "oath"
rather than "oaths". Even though there



[703]

[MRS OSEI-OPARE]

are two personalities or several
personalities, I think the context as it is,
"oath" is - "oath" and I think we should
accept that as being sufficient rather than
use the word in a plural form because I do
not think it adds anything.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, what the 1992 Constitution
provides in article 57(3) is that –

"Before assuming office the
President shall take and subscribe
before Parliament the Oath of
Allegiance and the Presidential Oath
set out in the Second Schedule to
this Constitution."

So they mention the two. That is the
way the 1992 Constitution captured it.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
to support that, Appendix C of our
Standing Orders, captured on page 136,
talks about "Forms of Oaths" There are
different oaths. So Mr Speaker, I do not
see why we should be splitting hairs over
this. I guess we can make much more
progress than the –

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Which
Schedule are you referring to? You said
"Forms of Oaths"? 

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: I am talking
About Appendix C of our Standing Orders.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: But the
1992 Constitution is here

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: I am talking
about the "Form of Oaths"

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Yes. But
the Second Schedule of the 1992
Constitution says "Forms of Oath".



[704]

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: The
Constitution?

I Mr First Deputy Speaker: Yes, Second
Schedule. 

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Well, I have
seen that one.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: "Forms of
Oath".

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: And in this
case, the Constitution supersedes the
Standing Orders?

Mr FirstDeputy Speaker". [Laughter]-
Yes –

Mrs Osei-Opare: Mr Speaker, I am
looking at the Constitution and the Bill. It
says, "Taking the Oath of Office". The
Oath of Office is the Oath of Allegiance,
the Presidential Oath. Is it not so? So in
my view, I think it is one –

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Yes, they
used the word; it should be "The Oath of
Office" - 

Mrs Osei-Opare: The Oath of Office
is one – 

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Yes.

Mrs Osei-Opare: And there are many
forms.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: The
Presidential Oath and the Oath of
Allegiance.

Mrs Osei-Opare:Yes. So I think it is
right to say "Oath" rather than "Oaths".

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, I think what I will do is that, I
will put the Question "on this amendment
subject to the further amendment to
change it to "President-elect".



[705] 

[MR FIRST DEPUTY SPEAKER]

Then after that, we come and look at
the issue of the "Oath". They are two
separate issues. 

Let me put the Question on this one
and then if we want to leave one to the
draftsperson, we can do so.

Question put and amendment agreed
to. 

Mr First Deputy Speaker: With regard
to the issue of "Oath" or "Oaths", I direct
that the draftspersons take a look at it and
put the proper rendition in the Bill.

I so direct.

Hon Chairman, we are still on clause 4

Mr Bandua: Mr Speaker, I beg to move,
clause 4, subclause (1), paragraph (b), line
4, before "department", delete "its" and
insert "the".

So it reads:

". . . including the Ministries and
the Departments and Agencies
under the Ministries".

I think that is a more appropriate
rendition. '

Alhaji H. Iddrisu: Mr Speaker, having
gone through the budget cycle year, I
have become very familiar with the words
"Ministries, Departments and Agencies".
Prof Gyan-B affour, having Worked at the
Ministry of Finance and Economic
Planning, I would want to be guided by
him; he has some expertise. So we should
use the known words - "Ministries,
Departments and Agencies (MDAs)" -
that is what we are told. So let the Words
reflect MDAs -~' Ministries, Departments
and Agencies - and it should be capital
letters. I should think so.


[706]

Prof. Gyan~Baff0ur: Mr Speaker, I
think he has drawn me in and I think I
support what he is saying. That will be in
consonance with the various descriptions
of these departments and agencies of
Government. 

Mr Speaker, there is nothing wrong with
this but that this is in line, in conformity
with what is known. That is all that he is—

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Minister, that is different from the
amendment that you are trying to -
What has been moved is different. But
more importantly, if you want to amend it
to be "Ministries, Departments and
Agencies", then you have to do further
amendments there.

So I do not know whether you are
pushing that line of amendment because
if you do that, then if you say "Ministries,
Departments and Agencies", you cannot
go back and say "under the Ministries".
Are you all right? Do you get What I –

Alhaji H. Iddrisu: I will go With the
Hon Chairman.

Question put and amendment agreed
to. 

Mr Bandua: Mr Speaker, I beg to move,
clause 4, subclause (1), paragraph (d), line
1, delete "Committee" and insert "Team".

I think that it is the transition team that
is expected to form the sub-committees
and not the committee as is- captured
here. So "Committee" is out of place, Mr
Speaker. 

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, this is a straightforward
amendment.

Question put and amendment agreed
to


[707] 

Mr W. O. Boafo: Mr Speaker, I beg to
move, clause 4, subclause (1), paragraph
(d), line 3, delete "Committee" and insert
"Team".

Mr Speaker, this amendment follows
the same reasons given by the Hon
Chairman.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: So it is
virtually the same amendment?

Mr Boafo: Yes; but different –

Mr First Deputy Speaker: It is the
same? It is consequential?

Mr Boafo: Mr Speaker, yes, it is
consequential.

Question put and amendment agreed
to.

12.50p.m. 

Mr Bandua: Mr Speaker, I beg to move,
clause 4, subclause (3), line 1, delete
"determine" and insert "follow" and in
line 2, delete "sub-committee" and insert
"Team". 

Mr Speaker, for the first amendment,
the -sub-committee is expected to follow
the procedure and not to determine the
procedure for its meetings. That is the
rationale behind the first amendment. The
second amendment is consequential.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Is there a
provision in the Bill that makes room for
the team to adopt a procedure? Hon
Chairman, if there is a provision in the Bill
that the team shall adopt its procedure,
then it means therefore, that the sub~
committee will have to follow-

Mr Bandua: Mr Speaker, I think it is
there. 


[708]

Mr First Deputy Speaker: It is not a
matter of "I think it is there." Show me
where it is, then I can put your Question.

Mr Bandua: Mr Speaker, I think it is
clause 3 (5).

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Therefore,
I will now put the Question on your
amendment. 

Question put and amendment agreed
to

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, I will now put the Question on
clause 4.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
I was going to move for the deletion of a
word in clause 4 (2.) that I thought was
superfluous even though, if it is
maintained, it will still do no harm to the
construction. 

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Which
subclause?

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsuz Mr Speaker,
clause 4 (2), the deletion of the word
"relevant" in line 3.

"A sub-committee shall consist of
not more than five persons who
shall select one of their number to
preside at the meetings of the sub-
committee."

It is not of the "relevant sub-committee."
It is the sub-committee. We should delete
the word "relevant".

Mr First Deputy Speaker: So which
one do you want to delete? Where do
you want us to end it?

Mr Kyei-Mensah Bonsu: The word
"relevant".
Mr First Deputy Speaker: I agree with
you, but does it cause any harm?



[709] 

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
it is superfluous. 

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Minority Leader, move the amendment
properly now.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
I beg to move, clause 4, subclause (2)
line 3, delete the word "relevant".

Question put and amendment agreed
to.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: I will now
put the Question on clause 4.

Mrs Osei-Opare: Mr Speaker, under
subclause (3), the amendments moved by
the Hon Chairman and the subsequent
one, there is_ something missing. This is
because I do share the amendment to
delete the word "determine" and to
substitute "follow" but it is incomplete -
- the words "a sub-committee shall
follow procedures for the meetings of the
team" are not correct. I think it should be
"determined" - by the team.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: I agree with
you. That is why earlier, I asked the
question whether there are a provision in
the Bill that said that the team shall
determine procedure, so they will follow
the procedure that have been determined
by the team, so that they will not have
their own procedure and the team too has
a separate procedure.

Move the amendment and let me put
the Question.

Mrs Osei-Opare: Mr Speaker, I beg
to move, clause 4, subclause (3), line 2,
insert "Procedure for the meetings
determined by the team".

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
that construction is rather worse.


[710]
Mr First Deputy Speaker: She has a
point so let us help her to get the proper
rendition.

Mrs Osei-Opare: All right
"A sub-committee shall follow the
procedure for the meetings as
determined by the team"

We have that already in clause 3 (5). So I
think it is a good rendition.

Prof. Gyan-Baffour: Mr Speaker, I do
not fnd the rationale behind why the sub~
committee should follow the procedure of
the team –

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member for Wenchi, the rationale behind
the amendment is that, a sub-conm1ittee
is a sub-committee and therefore, they
have to operate within the ambit of the
appointing authority, which will be for
purposes of discussion by the team. So
they do not adopt a procedure that is
absolutely different from the one that the
team is using.

It is just like our practice here, like
committees of this House as much as
practicable follow the Standing Orders of
this House, so that they do not import
Standing Orders from Iraq and adopt them
at the Standing Committee meetings. That
is the spirit behind the amendment.

Prof. Gyan-Baffour: Mr Speaker, I
really appreciate your explanation but you
said "as much as practicable." That means
we are not going to use the same
procedure that we use in this House in
the committees. So We do not have to
have the same procedures here as we have
in the Public Accounts Committee maybe,
within the context of our procedures but
they are not maybe, the same. 

But this one says we should follow the
same rules. If you have given a sub-
committee some function that does not
require that we use the procedure, What
happens? Do they have to use the
procedure?


[711]

Mr-Bandua: Mr Speaker, even in the
Bill, there is no provision for the sub-
committee determining the procedure.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: There is a
procedure. ‘That is what we are amending.
A standing committee shall determine the
procedure for the meetings.

Mr Bandua: The team determines the
procedure but the sub-committee –

Mr First Deputy Speaker: There is a
provision in the Bill which we are
changing, that they should not have their
procedure different from that of the team
which is in clause 3 (5), now that we have
agreed as a House that as much as
possible, they should follow the
procedure of the team. That is the spirit
behind your amendment and she is saying
that the sentence there is incomplete.

Now, the Hon Member for Wenchi is
suggesting that why should they have to
follow exactly -- If there is need for the
sub-committee to make a departure for
them to transact their business, why are
we restricting them from following that
procedure? That is the nature of the
discussion so far. I hope I am right.

l.00 p.m.

Mr Chireh: Mr Speaker, you are right.
So what I will suggest we should do is to
make sure that we add "as much as
practicable follow the procedure
determined by the team". I further
suggest, if they agree with this
amendment for it to be so determined.

Mr Kwasi Amoako-Attah: Mr Speaker,
I tend to associate myself with what was
expressed by Hon Prof. Gyan-Baffour.
This is because in practice, as soon as a
sub-cornmittee is set up, it presupposes
that a special reference is made to it. And
it could be even of a technical nature. So


[712]

if we restrict ourselves to a fundamental
view that a general procedure established
by a team should automatically be formed
by such a sub-committee, we may be
creating practical difficulties.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: You are
right. 

Mr Amoako-Attah: Mr Speaker, so, we
should be flexible and allow any sub~
committee to adopt its own procedure to
deal with matters depending upon what
has been referred to it, otherwise, we may
create problems in practice.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: You have
a point there.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu Mr Speaker,
it is the team that will be delegating
authority to the sub-committee; so the
sub-committee is supposed to operate
Within the ambit of the committee itself.
S0 the general authority should be the
remit of the sub-committee. That is why
in Parliament, for instance, in committees,
the committees are supposed to be
regulated by the rules and procedure
regarding plenary. But we have to provide
some room to allow for some amount of
respect. 

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Flexibility?

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
or flexibility. In which case, Mr Speaker, I
will propose that we have these renditions –

"In sub-committees, the procedure
for the meetings of the team shall
‘be observed so far as may be
applicable. It will be on the lines of
our own Standing Orders".

Mrs Osei-Opare: Mr Speaker -
[Interruption]
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, 'we have all agreed that we
should make room for some level of
flexibility. 



[713]

Mrs Osei-Opare: Mr Speaker, all right.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Now, what
is left is to get the right rendition, so that
we are all ad idem that we should inject a
certain sense of flexibility into the
provisions made. Otherwise, if the team
decides that the quorum shall be seven,
then they go to a sub-committee that says
that the total membership is five, then
they do not have the number. and they
will have a problem. That is why we al1
agree that we should inject a certain sense
of flexibility. 

Now what We have to agree on for me
to put the Question 1S the rendition to
capture the sense of the House.

Let me hear yours. I
Mrs Osei-Opare: Mr Speaker, I took
an earlier cue from my Hon Minority
Leader and so I am coming up with this
rendition –

Mr First Deputy Speaker: There is
only one Hon Minority Leader in this
House.

Mrs Osei-Opare: Mr Speaker, yes, we
know and –

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: So, you
cannot take the cue from your Hon
Minority Leader.

Mrs Osei-Opare: Mr Speaker, all right.
The Hon Minority Leader.

Thank you.

Mr Speaker. I propose this rendition:

"A subcommittee shall follow as
much as possible the procedure
determined by the team for the
meetings"

I said its meetings but let me just go
over again and it can be polished up –

"A subcommittee shall follow as
much as possible the procedure
determined by the team for the
conduct of the meetings."

Or "of the work that has been
assigned".


[714]

Hon Leader, you form a subcommittee
to perform a certain function or
assignment. At least, this is how far I
have gone –

"A subcommittee shall follow as
much as possible the procedure
determined by the team for the
conduct of its work".

Mr Speaker, this is for consideration.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
as you said, we are talking about the same
issue. Let me try something else on the
same lines. Once we ‘agree with the
principle, if we do not agree, then perhaps,
We may ultimately leave it with the
draftspersons to capture as --- but I have –

"In subcommittees, the procedure
for the meetings of the team shall as
far as practicable apply".

Mr First Deputy Speaker: I think
that is a better rendition that resolves the
matter. Take it again for the Table Office
to get it.

So, in effect, you are reviewing the
decision of the House because - Or you
are bringing your amendment -~The way
you are couching it now, you have to
bring it before the committee. So, move it
and move it professionally. You are
starting with "as much as possible . . ."
What you have just read.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
what I read is "In subcommittees, the
procedure for the meetings of the team
shall as far as practicable apply". Mr
Speaker, alternatively –

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Again.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
alternatively, we could go to clause 3 (5)
and amend that one. That one reads:

"The members of the team unless
otherwise, provided by this section,
shall determine the procedure for
the meetings of the team and the
subcommittees of the team".




[715] 

[MR KYEI-MENSAH-BONSU] 

If we like that, then we will delete this
one. If the first one is better, then we will
go for that.

Mr, First Deputy Speaker: I thought
you gave some rendition that sounded so
well. You got confused somewhere.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu No, I did not
get confused.

1.10 p.m.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Let us hear
that one.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu That one
reads: 

"in sub-committees, the procedure
for the meetings of the team shall as
far as practicable apply".

That is what I read the first time.
Prof. Gyan Baffour: Mr Speaker, I think
I agree with that rendition-

Mr First Deputy Speaker: So Hon
Minority Leader, you loaow you have to
delete the "a", that started the sentence
and then start with "in". Yes, very well
“in”

Hon Members, we all agree that on this
matter, we want to inject some flexibility
into this amendment.

So I will put the Question and if there
is any polishing to be done, the
draftsperson will do it. I think the sense
of the House is clear‘? The sense of the
House is now clear based on the issues
that you have raised -- [Interruption]

Mrs Osei-Opare: Mr Speaker, I
thought that it was clear~--his rendition
is very good. I believe that in the same
way, the second amendment he made
under 3 (5) is still relevant.


[716]

Mr First Deputy Speaker: No, we are
not talking about 3 (5). We are now on 4 –

Mrs Osei-Opare: "Shall apply"
means, then apply (5)

Mr First Deputy Speaker: No, no. We
are referring to subcommittees here.

Question put and amendment agreed to:

Mr First Deputy Speaker: If there is any
further polishing that will be done, the
draftsperson should do it and do it
accordingly.

I so direct. 

Clause 4 as amended ordered to stand
part of the Bill.

Clause 5 -Advisory Council

Mr Bandua: Mr Speaker, I beg to
move, clause 5, delete and insert the
following:

(1) There is established by this Act an
Advisory Council consisting of:
(a) one eminent citizen appointed by
the incumbent President; 
(b) one eminent citizen appointed
by the person elected as the
President, and 
(c) one eminent citizen appointed as
the chairperson of the Advisory
council by the eminent citizens
referred to in paragraphs (a) and
(b).

(2) Where the eminent citizens referred
to in paragraphs (a) and (b) of
subsection (1) fail to appoint the
chairperson of the Advisory
Council, they shall so inform the
Speaker of Parliament who shall then
become the chairperson of the
Advisory Council.



[717] 

[MR BANDUA]

(3)The Advisory Council shall
expeditiously determine the issue
referred to the Council under
subsection (4) of section 3, and the
decision of the Council binds the
team and all of the subcommittees
of the team.

This formulation makes it more
elaborate. So I do not know whether it
Will be necessary for us to read the new
provision.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Chairman of the Committee, have you
moved your amendment?

Mr Bandua: Mr Speaker, I have

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Very well

Mr Bandua: What I said was that we
have to delete the whole clause 5 and we
have provided a new formulation that is
to make it more elaborate. [Interruptions]

It is there, can you not read it yourself?

Mr Chireh: Mr Speaker, I am saying
he should read what he wants us to
substitute and he says I should read it
myself. If I am reading it myself, how can
I make any correction? 

Mr Bandua: So I will take the new
rendition.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
I would want to save the breath of my
Colleague.

The Hon Chireh is a very experienced
Member of Parliament and what the
Chairman of the Committee did is perfectly
right. Mr Speaker, I refer him to our
Standing Orders, Order I29 (c).


[718]

"At the Consideration Stage of a Bill-

(a)where an amendment appears on
the Order Paper and exceeds four
lines it shall not be necessary for
the Member moving it or Mr
Speaker in putting it to read out
the amendment",

Mr Speaker, so he is perfectly right.
This amendment exceeds four lines. So if
he says that he is drawing attention to
that to save this House precious time, he
cannot compel him to read it out. Mr
Speaker, the Chairman is correct and I
support the line that he has taken.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, any comments on the
amendment? I have an issue to throw to
the House to look at -- [Interruption] - I
am guiding the House. Hon Members we
have putt e word "eminent". Have you
defined it in the Bill? If you have not, can
somebody not raise a question that that
particular person who is appointed is not
an eminent person? 

Is the Hon Minority Leader an eminent
person if he is put there? Is the Majority
Leader or a Member of Parliament an
eminent person? Is a former Minister an
eminent person? Do you want to leave it
there and define it or you delete it
completely and leave it to the discretion
of the appointing authority’). That is an
issue I want to throw to the House before
I put the Question on the amendment.

Prof. Gyan-Baffour Mr Speaker, even
before you put the Question and before
this is resolved, I can see that there are
three eminent persons here instead of two
in this amendment. It says:

(a) one eminent -person appointed by
the incumbent President;
(b) one eminent person appointed by
the person elected as the President;
and
(c) one eminent person appointed as
the Chairperson of the Advisory
Council by the eminent citizens
referred to paragraphs (a) and (b).




[719] 

[PROF. GYAN~BAFFOUR]

It does not tell us that that one person,
that other eminent person is actually one
of the two. So they are going to be three.
So we have three eminent persons.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, What happens if there is a
disagreement between the two persons
they have provided for?

Mr Chireh: Mr Speaker, I really do
not agree with the way this eminent
persons are appointed. First and
foremost, the incumbent President gets
one eminent person, then the President-
elect gets an eminent person, then you
are saying, one eminent citizen appointed
as the Chairperson of the Advisory
Council by the eminent citizens referred
to. First, you have not appointed three
persons. You have only appointed two -
[Interruption] -- that is not proper.


We must invest this matter with
somebody to take the action; two people
cannot come and sit down and appoint
one person. Indeed, let us limit it to a range
that they can look at. I even think that we
should be looking at any of these other
offices where somebody automatically
comes in. This is because if you say two
people should come and sit down and
nominate a third person, in case they went
to the same school like me and the
Minority Leader and I, we can decide that
this man was also in Kwame Nkmmah
University of Science and Technology, he
should come and join us.

There must be something wrong. Let
us look at it very well. I think there is a
problem about it

Prof. Gyan-Baff0ur: Mr Speaker, I
think I share this view. Probably, that
person should be an ex-officio Member,
maybe, the Chief Justice or somebody. But
to say that two people, one appointed by
the current President, one by the one


[720]

coming in, bring two people there and
those two people are the ones going to
elect the Chairman of the Committee, I do
not think that is right.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Those two
people are going to nominate somebody
who is going to be the Chairperson of the
Advisory Council? 

Kwasi Amoako-Attah: Mr Speaker, I
think this position, in my view, with all
due respect, is perfect. Perfect in the
sense that two people would have already
been nominated, serving the respective
interests of the President and the
President-elect. If the two of them
mutually agree to appoint a third person,
I think that it would stand the test of time
and it would be the best arrangement.

It means that that person mutually
appointed would enjoy the confidence of
both of them and I believe it will create
compatibility and they will be able to work
together as a team. So I think this position
should not be changed.

Mr Chireh: Mr Speaker, the argument
he is making, if it is the same hut that
comes to power, the problem will not be
there. But if it is another party, you know
that -- people are labelled in a way. So
that was why I wanted us to look at an ex-
officio position, like we do in the Council
of State appointments where we say,
former Inspector-General of Police (IGP),
former Chief Justice or something. If We
can categorise these offices, which seem
to be neutral from all points of view,
anyone of them, we limit the range for
these two people to be able to appoint.

Otherwise, for two people, if for
instance, I am a prominent citizen and you
appoint me and you appoint Hon Kofi
Jumah, we will never come to an
agreement. I will nominate my leader and
he will also nominate the Minority Leader.
They will never agree -- [Interruption.]



[721]

1.20 p.m.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, there is a provision for where
there is disagreement -- [Interruption]
There is a provision in the Bill that where
there is a disagreement between those
two people nominated by the President-
elect and then the incumbent President,
the Speaker of Parliament becomes the
Chairperson.

Mr Chireh: ‘The Speaker? I think
that we should rather limit the category of
people that should be Chairperson for this
occasion. Either as I said, the former Chief
Justice or -- The Hon Member is nodding
his head, so I do not know. [Interruption]

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, the point is that in fact, what is
in the Bill itself is what they are trying to
recapture here and they are trying to, in
my view, improve upon it by bringing in
the Speaker of Parliament when there is
case of disagreement.

So maybe, we may have to polish the
rendition there a bit. But it is clear what
they Wanted to do .

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
as you rightly observed, this attempt was
to recapture what indeed, obtains in the
Bil1,_ that is the original form, trying to
make it more comprehensive and if you
like, more reader-friendly. But Mr Speaker,
I agree that to provide a very smooth take-
off, we need to have a situation Where
from the very outset, a platform would be
created for effective bonding together.

That is why if you provide the
opportunity to the two persons nominated
by the sitting President and the President-
elect, it would provide a useful platform
for us, once they are able to agree.

But we could have a practical problem
where it becomes difficult for the two of
them to agree, and that is where we have
provided that if they failed in that exercise,
then the Speaker of Parliament could then
assume the Chairship of the Advisory
Council. 

Mr Speaker, the difficulty that I have
is, which period are we talking about, that
is the period of disagreement? We have
not given ourselves any time frame. So if
we are not careful, that itself could also
continue ad. infinitum and it creates a very
serious problem. So either we define the
period or -- Let us not forget that all
through we were dealing with 24-hour
period, 48-hour period and so on and so
forth. If we have to come to make a similar
determination, it would be all right.

I, however, would want to propose a
further amendment because in all these,
we would want somebody who would be
adjudged or be perceived as a neutral
person even though I know certain people
may not want some institutional
representation. The Hon Member for Wa
West (Hon YI6l6h Chireh) mentioned some
personalities, the former Inspector-
General of Police (IGP), former Chief Justice
and so on. 

Mr Speaker, I would propose that in
place of the Speaker of Parliament, we just
say that after the nomination by the two
persons, the President of the National
House of Chiefs becomes the third person
to chair. The Speaker is shaking head-

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, you do not look and describe
the movement of the Speaker’s head-
[Laughter]

Hon Minority Leader, you are out of
order; 


Mr Avoka: Mr Speaker, this provision
or issue engaged our attention during the
winnowing of the Bill and the Hon



[723] 

[MR AVOKA]

Minority Leader was there; we took into
consideration the status of the Chief
Justice and said that at the end of the day,
we do not want to smear the Chief Justice
or taint the Office of the Chief Justice with
a perception that he or she was leading
this thing during the transition period. We
talked about the Speaker of Parliament and
we said that at all material time, the
Speaker of Parliament might be an arbiter
and would not want to be perceived as -
So we discussed it at length. We even
talked about the President of the National
House of Chiefs but we dismissed it at an
early stage.

That was why we .made this
compromise that all right, if we appoint
two eminent persons, let them come
together and look at the totality of
Ghanaians and then choose somebody
they can owe respect to, somebody they
have confidence in and trust a person
when he is chairing, they would respect
his opinion and the rest of them.

We thought that that was a middle way
of resolving this matter. But these other
personalities, the Chief Justice or
Speaker of Parliament and President of the
National House of Chiefs, we considered
Them-

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, should we defer this clause?
Should we defer this clause and look at
it‘? The reason I am saying that we should
defer this clause and take a closer look at
it is because the Hon Minority Leader
raised a very critical point in terms of the
time frame. When we talk about time frame,
then it becomes relevant in relation to the
incumbent President and the President-
elect and even the Speaker of Parliament
that we are putting there. It becomes very,
very critical because the incumbent
President might not even be in office when
the ‘Speaker of Parliament is sworn-in. So


[724]

what period are we talking about? The time
frame then becomes very important when
we then talk about the President-elect or
the incumbent President and all those
things. At that time, the roles might even
change and. we might even been talking
about somebody who has even left office.
So let us -- [Interruption]


Mr Cletus A. Avoka - rose –

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, you are on your feet I am saying
that we should defer it and take a second
look at it.

Mr Avoka: Mr Speaker, well, I do not
mind but I thought the period in question
was quite clear- We have completed,
election results have been declared, there
is a President-elect and then he has not
yet handed over; the incumbent President
has not yet handed over to the President-
elect. That is the period we are talking
about; that is the transition period So the
period is clear. But I agree that given its
sensitive nature and very important and
critical nature we can defer –

Mr First Deputy Speaker: But that is
the point the Hon Member is making.

Alhaji Inusah A. B. Fuseini: Mr
Speaker, I think that your observations are
right, the time period is quite clear but still
critical. The time period is between the
time that the person has been so declared
as elected and the time he is sworn-in.
This is because immediately he is sworn-
in, he becomes the President and he
becomes an incumbent now.

So the period is quite clear, except that
it is relevant in determining when the
decisions would be taken to -elect the third
person to chair. It is still relevant within
the time period context.



[725]

[ALHAJI FUSEINI]

Mr Speaker, the second thing I would
want to talk about is the issue that you
observed, the use of word "eminent". I
think we did not resolve it and this thing
came up. I think it is important, the use
of the word "eminent". I, after reading the
amendment, came to the conclusion that
the word‘ was advisedly used and in
choosing the Word, the promoters of the
amendment had a certain category of
people in view. So I think, Mr Speaker-

Mr First Deputy Speaker: But do the
Members of Parliament who are making
the law have a certain category of people
in view?

Alhaji Fuseini: Yes, MI Speaker;

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Is the Hon
Minority Leader an eminent person?

Alhaji Fuseini: He is. Clearly, in my
view – 

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Is he an
eminent person? 

Alhaji Fuseini: He is an eminent
person.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: What
about the Hon Majority Leader? 

Alhaji Fuseini: He is.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: What
about the Hon Deputy Minister for
Energy? 

Alhaji Fuseini: No, he is not.
[ Laughter. ] Mr Speaker, clearly-

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
on a point of information. Mr Speaker, this
is just information, which would be
relevant to the Hon Member on the floor.



[726]

Mr Speaker, I believe the Hon
Member has learnt his lessons well. We
have long moved and l believe the Hon
Majority Leader and Hon Yieleh Chireh
would agree with me -- Mr Speaker, I"
hope the Hon Majority Leader is listening.
I was just making the point that the Hon
Member, Hon Inusah Fuseini has learnt
his lessons very well and he
acknowledges the fact that we have long
moved from the period of the peoples, we
have moved into the era of citizens and
from citizens we have graduated to
eminent citizens. [Laughter]

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, you are also out of order.
[Laughter] Let me hear from the Hon
Member for Ayawaso West Wuogon, she
has been on her feet – 

Alhaji Fuseini: Mr Speaker-

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, you have not concluded?

Alhaji Fuseini: No, I have not
concluded.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: All right.
Wind up.

1.30 p.m.

Alhaji Fuseini: Mr Speaker, I agreed
and I have learnt my lessons very well.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Do you
understand the point that -he made and
you have agreed that you are not an
eminent person?

Alhaji Fuseini: I have agreed.
[Laughter] 

Mr Speaker, on a more serious note, I
think that the word "eminent citizen" if I
may be allowed to look into the choice of
these two words -- what motivated the
promoters of this amendment to choose
these two words, was looking at people




[727]

[ALHAJI FUSEINI]

who, one, maybe, non-partisan; two,
may be objective in taking decisions of
national interest; and three, would not
be associated with any political office.

I thought that that was what motivated
them to use these two words. If that is so,
Mr Speaker, we need to define within the
law who an "eminent person" is, and
clearly, I support the use of the words
"eminent citizen". So when these people
meet together to choose, we can transition
smoothly and not be dogged by matters
of politics, vengeance and vindictiveness
and all those things, Mr Speaker.

Mrs Osei-Opare: Mr Speaker, I
appreciate the word "eminent". However,
in this law, it cannot be used. For good
reason, there is no "eminent citizens" list
in Ghana which has been developed out
of the kind of criterion that the Hon
Member is proposing. We do not have it
and therefore we cannot put this in the
law - [Interruption.]

Prof. Gyan-Baffour -rose-

Mrs Osei-Opare: Wait, I have not
finished.

Owing to this, even look at the States
Awards, the Order of the Volta, Order of
so and so, all of us have got reason to
question even the qualification of some
of those who have received it.

So we cannot in this country really and
objectively, in the law, determine who an
"eminent citizen" is, even though like the
Hon Member said, the Majority Leader,
the Minority Leader can be "eminent" a
Deputy Minister will not be eminent. We
have it in our minds that we cannot define
it in law. 

So let us not go there. All I will suggest
and I agree with Mr Speaker is that, we
should go and sleep over it and think
about the whole process. What I would


[728]

like to throw in is that, we should not
create a situation whereby the Advisory
Board itself becomes a conflict situation;
whereby two people cannot agree and
therefore, now, we bring in the Speaker.
Let the construction be such that it
becomes a respectable body which is
devoid of controversy in such a manner
that they can actually play their role. But
if they become the subject of controversy,
for which then a Speaker has to be
brought in, then where lies their
"Advisory" nature and "eminence"?

So Mr Speaker, I would agree with you,
let us go and sleep over this, let us reflect
who we have in mind and find some
construction that will give us the kind of
Advisory Council that would be a
respectable Council that the whole nation
can look up to.

Prof. Gyan-Baffour - rose –

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Let me hear
from Hon Yileh Chireh, the Member for
Akropong, then the Member for Wenchi
andthen I will come back to you.

Mr Chireh: Mr Speaker, I still agree
with you but I would want us to narrow
down this whole matter to people who
have occupied some prominent offices in
the land. In all this, if the Chief Justice
was appointed by one party or one
President, we will know. So once you
give a list and say that a former Chief
Justice, a former Chairman of the Council
of State, they will all have inclinations, I
should say. But what we are looking for is
a very small and temporary job, which
must be done very quickly also.

So if you have debate as to who is the
third person, you will never get there. I
think that we should designate these
offices, the possible range and I- I may
also be bringing in that case some
suggestions how we can fl‘3.Hl6 it and get



[729] 

[MR CHIREH]

the three persons and the three person’s
job should be done in such a way that as
quickly as possible, they resolve
conflicts. You may even have them and
there may be no conflicts for them to
resolve. But it is important that we put
them in place. If you look at the categories
of people, you know that Judges normally
listen to parties and take a decision. 

So we may have to look at a Judge of a
Supreme Court [Interruption] No, We
Will not bring Catholic Bishop there
because he may disagree with the Jehovah
Witness when it comes to some rituals.

So I still think that we should look at
ex-officio positions and then also look at
people who in our reckoning, normally
perform their duties with neutrality,
something like that, for this particular Bill.
Time is of essence; we must get them
quickly to be there, so that when there is
a dispute, they can come this side. So the
three persons, l agree with the number, let
us also now restrict the category to a
certain group of people. 

As for the question of "eminent
persons" I do not agree with that, because
if I get elected as a President, I will decide
who is eminent. I can go and take my
village chief and say that he is eminent.
So that is why I think we should narrow it
by category. 

Mr Boafo - rose –

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member for Akropong.

Mr Avoka: Mr Speaker, if I may
intervene for us to make progress, given
the controversy, I think gradually, we are
arriving at something. So we can defer
this one and meet outside the Chamber,
to look at it and come back with a better
suggestion for adoption, so that we can
make progress in the other areas, subject
to your approval.




[730]

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Very well.
We will defer clause (5) but if you go to
have the discussion, look at the head-
note, whether it is proper. "Advisory
Council". But it is for dispute resolution.
So you should find out whether it is or it
is really an Advisory Council for purposes
of resolving disputes. If it is Advisory
Council, whom are they advising?
Meanwhile, what they are supposed to
do is to resolve disputes. So you look at
all these things when you go back.

Very well, Clause 5 -- accordingly
deferred. 

[Amendment deferred.]

Clause 6 - Handing-over Notes

Mr Bandua: Mr Speaker, I beg to
move, clause 6, subclause (2), paragraph
(b), subparagraph (ii), line l, delete "of
State and of the"

The new rendition will be: 

"the Ministries, Departments and
Agencies under the portfolio of
Ministers, and".

1.40 p.m.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
before we get there, we should look at
clause 6 (1) and I thought when you
referred to:

"The Office of the President shall
prepare a set of comprehensive
handing-over notes covering 'the
term of office of the President as the
executive authority under article 5 8
of the Constitution"

Earlier, we had used the Words "the
Presidency". I do not know Whether We
would not want to look at that. But if we
maintain 6 (1) as it is then for 6 (2), we
necessarily have to include the Vice
President.

[731] 

[MR KYEI-MENSAH-BONSU]

"The Notes prepared under
subection (1) shall include –

(a) the handing-over notes received
by the President, the Vice
President and the Ministers on
assuming office."

Maybe, for 6 (1), we could leave it as it
is but for 6 (b) –

Mr First Deputy Speaker: The Notes
shall include?

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu:

"(2) The notes prepared under
subsection (1) shall include :
(a) the handing over notes received
by the President, the Vice
President and the Ministers on
assuming office."
This is because Mr Speaker, in
subclause (4), we have captured
the sense that includes the Vice
President.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Minority Leader, if you look at (i), the
notes on the activities of the Vice
President is there. By mentioning article
58, they want to make it clear that the
executive authority is vested in the
President. But then they want to make
sure that it gives better and further
particulars and by so doing , they brought
in the President, the Office of the Vice
President and then in (b) (i).

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsuz Mr Speaker,
as‘I indicated, I would not have much
problem with 6(1). It is the 6 (2) (a) that
my concern lies with—

"The notes prepared under sub-
section l shall include:

(a)the handing-over notes
received by the President, the
Vice President and the
Ministers: on assuming
office"


[732]

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Minority Leader, the Vice President is
subsumed under the President, so he
does not normally receive –

Mr Avoka: Mr Speaker, practically, the
Ministers report to the President, they do
not report to the Vice President. So in
matters of this nature, if they prepare
handing over notes, et cetera, they
should go to the President- The Vice
President does not have a role to play in
this. 

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Otherwise,
somebody will argue that you should
bring in the Deputy Ministers too. So l
do not know.

Mr Boafo Mr Speaker, I heard you
saying that they should bring in the
Deputy Ministers.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: No!

Mr Boafo: If you go to the definition
of "Minister", the extended definition is
also to Deputy Ministers. But I quite
appreciate the fact that the Office of the
Vice President is within the expression of
"Office of the President".

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Yes, the
6(2) (a) that the Hon Minority Leader is
talking about, the question to ask
ourselves to resolve the matter is whether
the Vice President receives handing-over
notes from the outgoing Vice President.
The answer is, no. If the answer is no,
then the rendition there is all right. If the
answer is yes, then you have to bring in
the Vice President. So that is the way to
resolve the matter.

Mr Chireh: Mr Speaker, you have
already ruled- We do not need the Vice
President in this case but the amendment
that the Chairman has proposed is to the
effect that we remove "of the State and"
but we should add comma (,) to the
"Ministries" before We talk about the
departments and agencies. Further
amendment, the comma (,) must be added.

[733] 

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Minority Leader, are you all right?

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu Mr Speaker,
I have not had the experience before, I
was a Minister for a short period but it
was in the dying embers of injury time.
Mr Speaker, he has had the occasion to
be a Minister at the very outset. So if he
speaks to the issue that no handing over
notes, properly so-called, are given to the
Vice President, well, I am inclined to
believe him. 

The Hon Majority Leader is saying
that he is telling me on authority but he
started --- but even before the whistle
could be blown for the first corner kick,
he was out. He would not have the
requisite experience. So Mr Speaker, I
guess I will drop that amendment.

Mr Speaker, as we did early on, if we
delete – 

Mr First Deputy Speaker: The "the"
should be there.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: So it will then
read: "The Ministries, Departments and
Agencies", not "under the portfolio of
the Ministers", just to be in sync with
what we did earlier. 

Mr Chireh: I think that I support the
further amendment, so that We stop at
the "Agencies", rather than say "under
the portfolio" because it is Agencies
(MDAs) and we are talking about
departments and agencies under
Ministries.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, the earlier rendition that we
agreed to is "Ministries and the
Departments and Agencies under the
Ministries. That was what we agreed to.
So if you want it, then we use the same
terminology there.

[734]

Mr Chireh: Mr Speaker, what we are
talking about is 2 (b) (ii). Now, the
amendment is saying that it is "Ministries,
Departments and Agencies under the
portfolio of the Ministers". The whole
idea is that we should stop at "Agencies"
and not bring the portfolio and being
under Ministers. So it stops at
"Agencies".

So the rendition will now be "notes on
the activities of the Ministries,
Departments and Agencies"; and then
the "and" follows.

Mr Bandua: If you say "and Agencies"
which Agencies? You are assuming that
Agencies under the Ministries. But it is
an assumption. But if you say "and
Agencies", if you leave it there, I wonder
if it is complete-

1.50 p.m. 

Mr Chireh: Mr Speaker, we have
already in clause 4,-departments and
agencies. So it is already classified and
we are restricting this to this law. The
"agencies" here is mentioned because of
what we are doing. 

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, What we are saying there is that
the notes should include activities of
Ministries, Departments and, Agencies
and we are talking about the Office of the
President. So we know the Ministries,
Departments and Agencies when we use
that terminology. So that I do not think
that it would result in any controversy.
Hon Members, the further amendment
is to delete all the words after "Agencies"
in line 2 of clause 6, subclause (2),
paragraph (b), subparagraph (ii). 

-Question put and amendment agreed
to. 



[735] 

Mr Bandua: Mr Speaker, I beg to move,
clause 6, subclause (2), paragraph (b), add
the following new subparagraph: 

"(iv) political appointees".

I think that this amendment is
necessary, so that when a President-elect
assumes office, he would be apprised of
the state of the whole nation, because if
we leave out "political appointees", I think –

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members are we - how can you give a
report on all political appointees? Who is
a political appointee, Chairman of the
Committee?

Mr Bandua: Apolitical appointee is
somebody who has been appointed and
leaves office with the President. Those
who have been appointed by the
President and leave office with the
President. I think they are political
appointees. That is the way I understand
it, Mr Speaker.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: It does
not include the Speaker and the Deputy
Speakers -~ [Laughter] -- No, I heard a
comment that it includes the Deputy
Speaker - [Laughter]

Mr Chireh: I do not think that we
should add this. We are talking about the
Executive and the Executive is seen as
starting from the District Chief Executive,
Regional Ministers, to the Ministers at the
centre. But if we now say political
appointees, it would also include those
political appointees who are sent out as
Ambassadors. Are we going to report on
that too?

Mr First Deputy Speaker: It is there
in the definition.

[736]

Mr Chireh: Yes, but I am saying that
is why we should not add it because you
see, the notes will cover from here to –

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, if you look at our political
Ambassadors or High Commissioners,
they are under the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and Regional Integration and you
are reporting on the Ministries,
Departments and Agencies.

Mr Chireh: Mr Speaker, I thoroughly
oppose this amendment where we are
adding "political appointees". What is
listed here, We should leave it because
these are people who hold offices unless –

Mr First Deputy Speaker:
Government appointees in the District
Assemblies too.

Mr Chireh: Mr Speaker, or even some
Board members say that they are direct
appointees of the President. Are we also
going to report on them? So I think that
we should delete it. We should reject this
amendment. It is not good.

Mr Avokaz Mr Speaker, well, I was
part of the committee that proposed the
inclusion of political appointees. But
upon a second thought, I think it would
be so open-ended that it is safer to leave
it than to retain it. The definition is here
but it covers a lot of people. I think that
the Executive or those We have already
captured in the Bill can take care of those
who are their subordinates.

So if We have a Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Regional Integration, then his
briefing or his handing-over notes would
include information he has received from
"Ambassadors, whether they are political
Ambassadors or career Ambassadors. It
would include those. 



[737]

[MR AVOKA] 

Then if you are an advisor to a Minister
or to the Office of the President, your
handing-over notes would include all
those things. So I think that I would agree
that we should abandon this amendment

Mr Bandua: Mr Speaker, on this note
the amendment is withdrawn.

[Amendment by leave of the House
withdrawn.]

Mrs Osei-Opare: Mr Speaker, I do
share - it has been abandoned. But at
the same time, I believe that there are some
officers that legitimately should –

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, if you are talking about Board
members, they are also political
appointees. And then you are reporting
on the agencies, so each agency would
report on who the Board members were
Within the period and all those things. If
you are talking about Ambassadors who
are not career diplomats, the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and Regional Integration
would report on them.

Mrs Osei-Opare: I agree, Mr Speaker.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Yes, if you
are talking about District Chief Executives,
in the reports of the District Chief
Executives, you would report on the
Government appointees during that
period.

Mrs Osei-Opare: Mr Speaker, I think
if you had allowed me to finish, you would
have seen the angle I am coming from.
The angle I am coming from is not so
much those political appointees, like
maybe, Stan Dogbe or whatever. That is
not the people I am talking about. But I
do see a big hole. The Office of the Council
of State, these are serious offices provided
for in the Constitution but there is no


[738]

provision as to their report or handing-
over notes. The independent bodies like
the Commission on Human Rights
Administrative Justice (CHRAJ) or
Electoral Commission - [Interruption]

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Are they
part of the Executive? This is a
Presidential Transition Bill; are they art
of the Executive properly so-called? "They
are not.

Mrs Osei-Opare: No- Mr Speaker, we
are looking at a transition from one
government to another. This is the point
and the point I am getting at is, the
Constitution has" set up certain specific
bodies whereby the State spent money
legitimately on these offices. These offices
are not under the Presidency as such, it
would not be reported on under any
Ministry or department or agency, yet they
are bodies set up by the Constitution, such
as the Council of State, CHRAJ, the
Electoral Commission. Where are the
Handing-over-notes –

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, I direct that we Sit outside the
prescribed period, so that we can finish
with this clause 6.

Mrs Osei-Opare: Mr Speaker, my
point is for us to look at the status of these
people in terms of handing-over notes.
What work have they done to the office
that has set them up, so that proper
handing-over notes can be given to the
President-elect come 2013 -
[Interruption.] 

Mr Chireh: Mr Speaker, I rise on a
point of order.
As we are saying, we are talking about
transition arrangements for one President
called the Executive to hand over to
another. These other bodies that she is
talking about have offices and they leave
behind all the records, the things they
have done there, then people are
appointed to take over.

In the case of the Judiciary, the CHRAJ
and all these other bodies, they are people
who are to bring their reports to this House
and they report on their activities -




[739] 

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Moreover,
they are not people that leave with the
President. if you look at the definition,
they are not people who leave office with
the President. They would continue and
the reporting mechanism - Please –

2.00 p.m. 
Mrs Osei-Opare: Mr Speaker, the
Council of State does leave office after a
new President –

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Please,
because of the mandate of the
Constitution but it is not everybody on
the Council of State that has been
appointed by the President. The President
of the National House of Chiefs is not
appointed by the President. A former
Chief Justice is there by virtue of his
former position. A former Inspector-
General of Police is there by virtue of his
previous position.

The Chief of Defence Staff is there
because of his previous position. They
are not people who are brought in because
the Constitution says they should be
there. So, they are not political appointees
properly so-called.

Mr Avoka: Mr Speaker, if I may add the
referral to the Council of State. The
Council of State exists to advise the
President- It does not have executive
functions to do any other thing. If you
look at article 89, it says and I beg to
quote:

"There shall be a Council of State
to counsel the President in the
A performance of his functions."

So, what handing-over notes do they
need to prepare when they are only
advising the President? They do not need
to. 

[740]

So, I think that all those they are talking
about are those who perform executive
fi1nctions.- will come under the Executive
- either a Minister or the President, et
cetera. We do not need to add the political
appointees there.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: The Hon
Member who proposed the amendment
has abandoned the proposed amendment
Mrs Osei-Opare: Mr Speaker, I have
not. [Laughter]

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, if you say you have not, what
do you mean? You do not have any
amendment to argue on. There is no
amendment again.

Mrs Osei-Opare: Mr Speaker, with all
seriousness, I believe not every political
appointee needs to report and I agree with
the withdrawal. But I am proposing that
in addition to the Ministries, Departments
and Agencies, there - are certain
institutions or establishments which we
should include to give handing-over
notes. That is all I am saying. And I am
citing, for instance, the Council of State
which dissolves after –

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, are they going to put in there
the advice that they have given the
President, which the President has not
taken or has taken - are those the things
that they are going to put there?

Mrs Osei-Opare: Well, Mr Speaker, we
have not given any format upon which
Ministries, Departments and Agencies
are to report. Have we‘? So, I would not,
in the same vein, give the format.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member for West Ayawaso West
Wuogon, "what" we are dealing with
"notes on the activities of’ -- the area
that we are dealing With-- Is the President
in the handing-over notes, going to state
that in our activities, these are the pieces
of advice the Council of the State has
given me but I have taken three. I decided
not to take the rest.


[741] 

Mrs Osei-Opare: Mr Speaker, all I will
say is that, they should be given the space
to determine what information they put
just like any others. 

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member for West Ayawaso Wuogon, if
you feel strongly about some categories
that should be there, I want you to come
back during the Second Consideration
Stage, so that we can then include it
because the Hon Member who moved the
proposed amendment has abandoned the
proposed amendment. 

But if you feel strongly that there are
some areas that ought to be brought here,
then think about it, so that I can put the
Question on the clause 6, then you can
come properly during the Second
Consideration Stage. I do not know.

Mrs Osei-Opare: Mr Speaker, I thank
you for that advice and I am urging Hon
Members to reflect upon it, so that when
it comes on the floor, they will co-operate
and be supportive for the good of the
country.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
I think in principle, I agree with the Hon
Chairman withdrawing the amendment.
Even though I also believe that there are
some persons operating at various levels -
appointees who need to account for their
stewardship.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Whose
stewardship should be included in the
handing-over notes -- not account? The
Auditor-General audits their books but the
activities must be included.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
I do not mean "accounting" in the order
of the Accountant-General or whoever but
I am talking about some responsibility to
account for their activities


[742]


Mr Speaker, if you look at how we have
captured the Presidency -- we are talking
about the Office of the President and the
Office of the Vice President, in which case,
we could safely include people operating
within that office under both the President
and the Vice President.

So, we could effectively capture those
people because of how we have couched
it here. Maybe, what she is perhaps
directing attention to is what of those
others who operate with the ‘Ministers,
maybe, Regional Ministers, District Chief
Executives (DCEs) and so on. Is there a
way of capturing it? If there is a way, so
be it. Otherwise, as I said, basically, I agree
with the withdrawal of the amendment but
if there is a way to also capture the
activities of some people at some levels
who we deem to be very important, we
can also look at that. 

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Well, at the
appropriate time- As of now, there is no
amendment there.

So, Hon Members, I would put the
Question on clause 6; not the proposed
amendment. 

The first proposed amendment, which
we further amended has been carried.

The second proposed amendment has
been withdrawn.

But let me put the Question on the
clause 6.

, Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
just a little thing - clause 6 (3)

"The handing-over notes shall
reflect the accurate developments
which have taken place during the
relevant tenure of office and the
projections of development to take
place before the end of the full
tenure." 

Again, Mr Speaker, I believe the word
"relevant." in line 2 is superfluous and may
have to be deleted.


[743] 

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Move the
amendment.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
I so move. 

Mr Osei-Owusu: Mr Speaker, I beg to
second the amendment moved by the Hon
Minority Leader.

Mr Speaker, as soon as we leave a
matter which is open to interpretation and
sometimes left to the idiosyncrasies of the
person interpreting it, then we leave room
for ambiguity. Who determines what is
relevant and-what is not. So, I guess it
will help the cause of this Bill if we remove
that word "relevant". –

Alhaj i Fuseini: Mr Speaker, I opposed
the proposed amendment.

A And I do so on the fact that "relevant"
in the place is an adjective that qualifies
the tenure of office. It is not standing on
its own. And it can happen in a situation
Where a person is appointed a Minister
and changed to another Ministry within
the same term. And so What this
"relevant" is there to do, in my opinion, is
to say that the handing-over notes must
be relevant to the "tenure of office
immediately coterminous to the time that
the person is handing over. That is what
it intends to do.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon Deputy
Minister, we are talking about the
President’s handing-over notes. And it is
the President’s handing-over notes that
will include that of the Hon Ministers. 

Alhaji Fuseini: No, it is everybody’s.
It says that the

"The handing over notes shall reflect
the accurate developments which have
taken place during the relevant tenure of
office and the projections of development
to take place before the end of the full
tenure."



[744]

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, we are talking of the handing-
over notes of the President and the
activities that should be reported on. They
are not going to be like -- and in it, the
Ministries, Departments and Agencies are
going to be part of the Office of the
President handing-over notes. And we
are talking about the tenure of the
President and the President alone -- This
is because the executive authority is
vested in him under article 58.


So, all the Ministers that have held
positions are all his Ministers. Whether
they were there for only one year or two
years, they are all his Ministers during
this tenure. And that is what we are talking
about. If you look at it, they said:

"The notes prepared under
subsection (I) shall include –

(a) the handing-over notes received
by the President and the Ministers
on assuming office; and

(b) notes on the activities of. . ."

So the notes on your activities in your
Ministry. 

Alhaji Fuseini: Precisely so, Mr
Speaker.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: So, during
that tenure, the Ministers are Ministers
of the President.

2.10 p.m.

Alhaji Fuseini: Precisely so, Mr
Speaker. I get the impression- I might
be wrong- but I get the impression that
the relevant tenure of office 1S not limited
to the President alone. It extends to
include his appointees and the tenure of
office or handing-over notes must relate
as to an appointee, the relevant time that
he was in the office. That is the impression
I get.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Well, my
understanding is that, this is a President’s
handing-over notes. We are only
elaborating what should be included in
his handing-over notes. We are only



[745] 

[MR FIRST DEPUTY SPEAKER]

elaborating by these clauses as to what
should be included. If during that period,
at the Ministry of Energy, there were ten
Ministers, you have to report on all the
ten Ministers during that period. But as
for him, it is his tenure that he is reporting
on. It is not a separate handing- over
notes; whatever you would prepare at
your Ministry, is going to be part of the
President‘s handing-over notes. So we
are talking about the tenure of the
President.

Are you still opposed to the
amendment?

Alhaji Fuseini: No, Mr Speaker, l
withdraw my opposition to the
amendment.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, have you been intimidated?
[Laughter] Have you been intimidated
in withdrawing your amendment?

Alhaji Fuseini: No. Mr Speaker,
indeed, you have added further and better
particulars to what is here, because,
actually, you have said and I heard you
clear, that even if they were ten Ministers
at the Ministry of Energy, the President is
obliged to report on their activities during
his tenure of office. It means, where the
Minister was removed before the end of
the tenure of office of the President, the
President is obliged to report. That is the
impression I am getting from your
intervention. And I am saying –

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, that is the impression that is in
the Bill.. Once they want to put emphasis
on article 58 of the Constitution, which is
in subclause (1), then they want to say
that you are the President; all executive
authority that is being exercised, they are
exercising it on your behalf, and therefore,
you are reporting on the activities of your
appointees and all of them.


[746]

Alhaji Fuseini: Mr Speaker, that is
exactly what motivated me to oppose the
amendment, because that would be an
exercise in futility. This is because the
first Minister would have handed over to
another Minister, which Minister would
have continued with the work of the
Minister who has so handed over, up to
the time that the President would be
reporting. And the first one’s activities at
the Ministry will no longer be relevant to
the President’s handing-over notes
because they would not be --
[Interruptions.]

Prof. Gyan-Baffour: Mr Speaker, I do
not understand what the Hon Member is
saying. It is actually the President’s
handing-over notes; and if the President
appointed 20 Ministers during his tenure
of office, so be it. It is the notes from the
President. So it is not about you giving it
to another one and another one giving it
to another one - -

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Do not
Worry, they are not going to hold you
responsible for - [Laughter]

Alhaji Fuseini: Mr Speaker, I am not
talking- Actually, to be honest with you,
I was thinking that it would be an exercise
in futility. If you so think that the
President, having been appointed
President will have to report on all
Ministers from the first one he has
appointed to the last one, if he is serving
an eight-year period, so be it. I was just
thinking that –

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, we are talking about the
President and his tenure and his handing-
over notes. I do not know whether there
could be any different interpretation from
What Hon Members are saying, and that
motivated the amendment there and I
entirely agree with them I do not know-


[747] 

Alhaji Fuseini: Mr Speaker, we are
talking about the same thing, handing -
over notes.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Yes, of the
President.

Alhaji Fuseini: But the issue is the
content of the handing-over notes; that
is what I was talking about.
[Interruptions] We are talking about the
handing-over notes. But what must go
into the handing-over notes is what has
motivated me to oppose the amendment,
which is asking for the removal of –

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, if the President is giving handing-
over notes for four years in office, does
it matter how many Ministers that worked
during the period at a particular Ministry?

Alhaji Fuseini: It does not really
matter. But which Ministers’ work would
be part of his handing-over notes is what
I was talking about.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: If during
that period he worked with ten Ministers
in a particular Ministry, he would indicate
all of them. That is all.

Alhaji Fuseini: ‘Very well, Mr Speaker.

Mr Speaker, but I have not been
intimidated at all.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Very well.
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
as you rightly indicated to the Hon
Member, who has been very laborious
about making his points-- Mr Speaker,
fancy a situation where the President
maybe, creates a Ministry, but in the
course of his tenure, the Ministry
becomes extinct; let us say Ministry for
Parliamentary Affairs, two years into the
President’s administration, it becomes

extinct. Nobody is saying that, that
activities which were conducted there
would not have to be reported on,
because it is part of the tenure of the
President. So if you agree and indeed, Mr
Speaker, as you said, article 58 (3), every
Minister is a subordinate to the
Presidency, he is responsible to the
President. So I did not see the grounds
for the litigation –

Question put and amendment agreed to

Clause 6 as amended ordered to stand
part of the Bill.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Clause 7-
- There is no amendment there; that is
why I am putting it. Unless somebody
Wants to file an amendment, in that case, I
would not put the Question at all. There
is no amendment that has been advertised
there, so that we would continue with
clause8 tomorrow.

Mr Joseph Darko-Mensah: Mr
Speaker-

Mr Speaker: If you have an
amendment, then I would. end the
Consideration of the Bill here. Kindly file
your amendment, so that other Hon
Members Would be availed of the nature
of the amendment, even though the rules
allow you to do the amendment now.

2.20 p.m.

Mr Avoka: Mr Speaker, I wish he was
given a minute’s opportunity to say what
he Wants to say, so that we can dispose
of it and know that we are done with
clause 7. What he is doing now is an alter-
thought and I am not sure it will carry the
day. 

Mr Darko-Mensah: Mr Speaker, if we
take clause 7 (2) (b) (i), I would like to
delete "the Speaker" and replace it with
"Parliament", the distribution of the
handing-over notes.


[749]

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Why are
you deleting the "Speaker"?

Mr Darko-Mensah: Mr Speaker, I
believe that if we make it Parliament, it is
understood that even if the
correspondence was sent to the Speaker,
it would end up on the floor of the House.
But if it is Madam Speaker or Mr Speaker,
it might end up on the shelf of the Speaker
and nobody might have access to that
information. And if you take the time
that these notes are supposed to be sent
to the Administrator-General, it is
supposed to be 30 clear days before the
election and it is very important that,
maybe other people might be interested
in the handing-over notes.

If we take the Council of State, they
never said the Chairman of the Council of
State, they said the Council of State. That
means that the copies have to be made
available to virtually everybody in the
Council and I strongly believe that we
should be able to do same. 

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, let us go and think through that
amendment and then we come back and
look at it.

Mr Avoka: Mr Speaker, but if you look
at that section he is referring to, they are
talking about offices, the Speaker, the


[750]

Chief Justice; they did not say the
Judiciary or the Chairman of the Council
of State or the Director of the National
Archives. They are talking about the
office holders. So it is possible that if the
Speaker gets a copy Parliament has got a
copy. 

Nana Abu-Bonsraz Mr Speaker, I
thought you had given your advice or
ruling that we go and think through, so –

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Then he
should file his amendment and then we
look at it.

Nana Abu-Bonsra Yes. So I was
wondering why the Majority Leader still
wanted to prolong ---

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, that brings us to the end of the
Consideration Stage of the Presidential
(Transition) Bill, 2010 for today. 

Hon Members, it is past two o’clock.
The House is adjourned till tomorrow at
10' in the forenoon, 

ADJOURNMENT
The House was adjourned at 2.22
p.m. till Thursday, 9th February, 2012
at 10.00 a.m.



