FOURTH SERIES VOL.75 No.2

26TH OCTOBER, 2011


PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES

OFFICIAL REPORT

WEDNESDAY, 26TH OCTOBER, 2011

CONTENTS

VOTES AND PROCEEDINGS AND THE OFFICIAL REPORT- [Col. 111]

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS -
Ministry of Education -- [Col. 111]

STATEMENTS- 
i) Strike by Members of the Ghana Medical Association (GMA)-[Col. 138]
ii)Floods in Accra- [Col. 170]
 
ADJOURNMENT-- [Col. 170]

Correction of errors of substance may be made only on the floor of the House with the permission of
the Speaker. However, correction of typographical or grammatical errors which Members suggest for
the Bound Volumes which _will be compiled at the end of the Meeting may be clearly marked in the Daily
Report, and the copy containing the corrections must be received at the Editor's Office, Parliament
House, not later than four clear days after the publication of the Daily Report.

BOUND VOLUMES of Debates (with comprehensive Index) are issued periodically during the Session
There is no fixed subscription rate, but prices will be quoted and standing orders entered on
application.

Printed by Department of Official Report
Parliament House, Accra

[111] 

THE
PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC 
OF GHANA 

THIRD MEETING; 2011

Wednesday, 26th October, 2011

The House met at 10.50a.m.

[MR SECOND DEPUTY SPEAKER IN
THE CHAIR]

PRAYERS

Votes and Proceedings and the Official Report. 

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Item 2.
Hon Members, correction of Votes and
Proceedings of Tuesday, 25th October,
2011.

Page 1...9

Mr Samuel A. Akyea: Mr Speaker, I
think the Speaker in the Chair yesterday
was your goodself and not Rt Hon Joyce
A. Bamford-Addo.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: The Rt
Hon Speaker started proceedings.

Mr Akyea: Oh, all right, I am sorry; I
am sorry. 

[No correction was made in the votes
and Proceedings of Tuesday, 25 October,
2011.]

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, Item 3 -- Question - Hon
Minister for Education. 

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

MINISTRY OF EDUCATION

Schools in the New Juaben South
Constituency

(Provision of Infrastructure)
Q. 679. Ms Beatrice Bernice Boateng
asked the Minister for Education what
measures were being put in place to
ensure that suitable infrastructure is put


[112]
up in some schools in the New Juaben
South Constituency to enable them stop
the shift system.

Minister for Education (Mrs Betty
Mould-Iddrisu): Mr Speaker, the New
Juaben Municipality in the Eastern Region
has 84 kindergartens, 84 Primary Schools
and 55 Junior High Schools.

Currently, we are informed that 23
primary and 5 Junior High Schools are
actually running the shift system. Out of
the 23 primary schools, 17 are in the New
Juaben South Constituency and 6 in the
New Juaben North Constituency. All the
5 Junior High Schools which run the shift
system are in the New Juaben South
Constituency. 

The Municipal Assembly in its effort
at providing infrastructure to stop the shift
system has provided classroom blocks for
Adweso R/C Primary and Junior High
Schools and Ada Kyerematen M/A
Schools at New Juaben South
constituency. The Assembly is also in the
process of completing a storey building
at Nana Kwaku Boateng C & D Primary
School and all in the New Juaben South
Constituency.

Nsukwao M/A A&B Primary Schools
in the New Juaben South Constituency
and Oyoko Roman Catholic Primary
School in the New Juaben North
Constituency have been merged due to
low enrolment.

There are plans also to merge schools
where enrollment is not too high. 

Ms Boateng: Mr Speaker, I thank the
Hon Minister for the in-depth research
that has been done in providing this
Answer. But I want to still ask the Hon
Minister, out of 17 schools in the New
Juaben South Constituency that are still
running shift - from her Answer, one
primary school and one Junior High
School have been provided with
classroom blocks. Still there are efforts to





[113] 

[MS BOATENG]

do something else. Mr Speaker, I must
say that even the classroom blocks that
have been provided for Adweso R/C and
the Junior Secondary School are without
furniture‘? yet, they have been handed
over to the school but are not operating.
I want to find out when they are going to
be made operational. 

11.00a.m.

Mrs Mould-Iddrisu: Mr Speaker, I
wish to thank the Hon Member very much
for the information.

I wish to inform her that we are in the
process of finalising the supply of
furniture to those schools she mentioned
and other schools in the municipality. We
anticipate that these pieces of furniture
would be provided before the end of the
year. 

Ms Boateng: Mr Speaker, from the
third paragraph of the Hon Minister’s
Answer, and Mr Speaker, with your
permission, l quote:

"The Assembly is also in the process
of completing a storey building. . .

By the word "completion", my mind
tells me that it has been started. But from
my own observation, only one floor out
of three storeys has been built. The one
floor has been there for quite a long time
now. 

Even last week when I went there,
nothing more had been done. Again,
because it has been "floored", water
gathers there and it causes electrical"
shocks and other things. This is the
"something little" that has been done. I
would want to know how they are
completing the supposed storey building
for the use of the students. 

Mrs Mould-Iddrisu: Mr Speaker, I
thank the Hon Member for drawing this
to our attention.

 It is unfortunate and we will ask
external consultants, the Architectural and


[114]

Engineering Service Limited (AESL), to
give us a report immediately and instruct
them to continue work.

Ms Boateng: Mr Speaker, I still want
to thank the Hon Minister and to again
ask that, one out of 17 schools has been
provided with classrooms to stop the shift
system. Lt means we are left with l6 primary
schools which are still running shift. May
I know when, given time, this will be
completed to enable the others also stop
the shift system that we have preached
all this time?

Mrs Mould-Iddrisu: Mr Speaker, as it
is well known, the responsibility for the
cessation of this system is the
responsibility of the District and Municipal
Assemblies. We come in to assist them in
providing infrastructure. The Ghana
Education Service (GES) would then give
them teachers when they are able to
provide the infrastructure, if not, we
support them and I must say that I cannot
give her the figures Offhand for that of
New Juaben .

But I know that we have poured
considerable resources in the Eastern
Region and if that is a peculiar problem in
that municipality, we will talk to the
Municipal Chief Executive and see how
we can support him, possibly with other
programmes during 2012. 

MS Cecilia Abena Dapaah: Mr Speaker,
l just wanted to find out from the Hon
Minister whether some of these schools
practising the shift system are running the
schools under trees?

Mrs Mould-Iddrisu: Mr Speaker, the
question is unclear to me. Is she talking
about all over the country?

l am informed that the shift system is
primarily practised in the municipalities,
in cities where there have been high
enrolment figures. I am aware that there


 
[115] 

[MR MOULD-IDDRISU]

are some few schools under trees in the
Greater Accra Metropolis. I am not aware
that they are running a shift system. As I
said, shifts are conducted mainly in
crowded urban areas and we do not see
many schools under trees there. I am
unable to answer the question in its
entirety.

Ms Cecilia Dapaah: Mr Speaker, I was
just wondering because I noticed in Abutia
near Sokode in the Volta Region that the
funds for constructing a school has been
allocated to another high school to
construct a dormitory and a dining hall,
that is where I am coming from. This is
because if as a result of the shift system
there is a spillover and the children are
running schools under trees, the funds
earmarked for the construction of schools
to help them move from the vagaries of
the weather, should be used for the
purpose.

So I would urge the Hon Minister to
send someone to go and find out. There
is a signboard there, in Abutia. If she gives
me her phone number, I can even send it
to her phone because I am very worried
about that. 

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Minister, do you want to react to that or it
is well taken?

Ms Cecilia Dapaah: It has been well
taken.

Mr Hackman Owusu-Agyemang: Mr
Speaker, I hope the six in my constituency,
New Juaben North would soon be taken
off? The question that beats my mind is
in her penultimate paragraph and I quote,

"Nsukwao M/A A & B Primary
 Schools in the New Juaben South
Constituency and Oyoko Roman
Catholic Primary School in the New
Juaben North Constituency have
been merged due to low enrolment."


[116]

It is physically impossible. to merge
them because they are more than five miles
apart. So I do not understand precisely
what the Hon Minister means. Does she
mean that the Ministry has merged the
Nsukwao Primary Schools with Oyoko
Roman Catholic Primary School? That
means all the people have to come down
everyday and it is quite expensive.

There are other schools from Oyoko
all the way to Effiduase before one even
gets to Koforidua. So I do not see how
the Ministry’s technicians decided to
merge a school which is that far away and
how practicable that is. It makes it almost
impossible work because in Oyoko itself
there are schools in Jumapo, next is
Asokore, next is Effiduase, all of them
have schools that could be merged, why
do they all have to go to Koforidua which
is quite a burden on the people. I would
like to know the rationale behind the
merger which takes more than five miles
into consideration. 

Mrs Mould-Iddrisu: Mr Speaker, I take
his point here about the distances in the
schools. But we are talking about, I
believe, shift systems in the schools and
these mergers are in regard to shift
systems. I can get you further and better
particulars. This is my information.

Mr Owusu-Agyemang: Mr Speaker, I
believe my Sister the Hon Minister really
has circumvented the issue.

What I am asking is, what informed the
decision to merge a school in Oyoko and
Koforidua to Nsukwao? What was the
rationale? That is what I want to know.
What informed it? There are more than 20
schools in-between. Why did they have
to go that far? 

In fact, it is more than five miles, and
the charge from Oyoko by trotro is almost
50p, ¢5,000.00 and so there is ¢l0,000.00
the student will spend. So what was the
rationale in doing that? That was the point
I want to understand.


[117] 

Mrs Mould-Iddrisu: Mr Speaker, the
point is well made. As I said, the shift
systems are actually run by the District
Assemblies and not the Ministry of
Education per se. [Interruption]

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Order!
Order!

Mrs Mould-Iddrisu: Mr Speaker, this
is something that we will have to look at.
I take your point and I will look at it.

Thank you very much. 

Dr A. A. Osei: Mr Speaker, I do not
know whether it is a question or not but I
want the Hon Minister to take note. We
are talking about the shift system and
about two weeks ago, I visited my
constituency. Two of the oldest schools
there are running a shift system which is
creating a situation where the students
are having to sit outside. In that case, I
do not know what the Ministry can do to
assist these two schools in my
constituency - Tapase A and B. And
this is about two weeks ago that I visited.

Mrs Mould-Iddrisu: Mr Speaker, as I
said, with the increase in enrolment
figures, there has been this problem of not
being able to keep the infrastructure
development and not being able to keep
up with the numbers. This is something
that the ‘Ministry and the District and
Municipal Assemblies are looking at. The
challenges are many in abolishing the shift.
system.

I think you can see that it has been
really successful here in Accra, in
particular where the Mayor has taken up
the challenge and has tried his best to go
out to ensure that the schools do not run
the shift system. We come in with the
teachers, it is the primary responsibility


[118]

of the Assemblies to run this but we will
have a look at the situation the Hon
Member spoke about.

Thank you. 

Mr Charles- Hodogbey: Mr Speaker, I
think the shift system has been posing
problems all over the country. The Hon
Member who spoke earlier asked whether
the shift system could be included among
schools under trees. I would like to know
from the Hon Minister, since there are
infrastructural problems -- has her
Ministry any policy to phase out the shift
system all over the country?

Mrs Mould-Iddrisu: Mr Speaker, it is
an extremely important issue and we, as a
Government, are committed towards
improvement of quality basic education.
Definitely, challenges facing inadequate
infrastructure across the country, in a
situation where we have some eighteen
thousand primary schools and thirteen
thousand junior high schools remain high.
We are looking at this; We are committed
towards assisting the Assemblies to
abolish the shift system.

At any point in time, when the
situation, come to our notice, especially
in cases of schools under trees, we try to
act as expeditiously as we can. I have
sent a direction to the Municipal and
District Assemblies to let me know their
challenges and to urge them to
progressively abolish the shift system; let
me know their challenges and the Ministry
will do all that it can to assist them by
provision of infrastructure.

I thank you, Hon Member.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Thank
you very much, Hon Minister.

We move on to the Question numbered
680 standing in the name of the Hon
Member for Sefwi Akontombra.


[ll9] 

Mr Herod Cobbina: Mr Speaker,
Question 680 was advertised in the
Parliamentary Agenda from 2010 to 2011,
The Question is no more relevant. I wish
therefore to stand down the Question.

Thank you, Mr Speaker.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: You
would want to withdraw it?

Mr Cobbina: Mr Speaker, I withdraw
the Question.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: I take it
that your need has been satisfied.

Mr Cobbina: Mr Speaker, yes.

[Question Number 680 withdrawn by
leave of the House.]

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Thank
you. Question 681 in the name of the Hon
Member for Adenta.

Mr Kojo Adu-Asare: Thank you, Mr
Speaker. I would like to also stand down
the Question or withdraw the Question.
It seems to me it is no longer relevant at
this moment.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Your
need has been satisfied?

Mr Adu-Asare: Mr Speaker, not
necessarily but in my view, l want to
withdraw and find another way to get the
answers.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Thank
you very much.

[Question Number 68] withdrawn by
leave of the House]


Mr Osei Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr
Speaker, first of all, I had wanted to ask a
follow-up question to Question 679.
Unfortunately, 1 could not catch your eye.
I thought it was going to be very relevant
but –

[120]

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Minority Leader, please continue-

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
the issue that we are witnessing here, if a
Question is asked and admitted by the Hon
Speaker and it is advertised for asking,
the Hon Minister comes here, ready to
answer the Question-~ If the person who
filed the Question gets up to say that he
is satisfied, therefore he is not ready to
ask the Question, any Hon Member could
do that. This is because it then becomes
the property of this House.

Perhaps, somebody else had in mind
to ask a similar Question and the person
files the Question, the person then who
thought he could ask a similar Question
is stopped from asking a similar or the same
Question. It becomes the property of this
House. So, if the person in whose name
the Question is, rises up to say that he is
not interested, anybody may feel
competent to ask the question, it will not
lie in the mouth of the person in whose
name the Question is advertised alone to
stand to have the Question stood down.

Mr Speaker, I believe that may go
against the grain of the Standing Orders.

Mr Joseph Yieleh Chireh: Mr Speaker,
what the Hon Minority Leader is saying
cannot be generally acceptable. First of
all, if it is a constituency-specific question,
then it is only within the - it is for the
Hon Member of Parliament for that
constituency who should ask it. if he
says he is satisfied, that ends the matter.
If it is of a general nature affecting policy,
what he is suggesting may be agreed
upon, but everything that is in the
possession of this House, it is not
necessary for everybody to ask a
question. 

So, I think that he is misleading all of
us, on this issue and I do not know which
part of the Stan ding Orders he is standing
on.



[121]

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: I wanted
to ask, the Hon Minister, he said it cannot
generally be done but can it be done under
some circumstances? I just wanted some
clarification.

Mr Chireh: Mr Speaker, what I am
saying is that, even in this House,
decisions have been that if somebody
asks a constituency-specific question,
even the Supplementary Questions
relating to the Question are limited to that
Hon Member. [Interruption] Yes! lam
saying so because, what he is saying is
that, the moment a Question is asked, it
becomes the property of this House,
therefore anybody who is not even in that
constituency can ask the Question, it is
too general.

It is not going to be a good practice if
it is made a convention. If the Question
the Member is asking is a general policy
issue, tine, but not a constituency -
specific Question, maybe about
construction of a district education office.
Is he going to worry his constituency if it
is not constructed?

11.20a.m.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
the Hon Minister who rose up to
challenge what I said unfortunately did
not refer to any Standing Order which
supports his claim. In the Standing
Orders, no distinction is made between
constituency-specific question and non~
constituency specific question. Where in
the Standing Orders do we have this? 

Yes, we are trying to cultivate this
convention when in particular the House
is about to recess and we are hard pressed
for time; we then have this negotiated way
to have the proceedings in Parliament
facilitated.

Mr Speaker, it is for convenience, it is
not a rule and Orders 68 and 69 would not
support what he is saying. Mr Speaker,


[122]

the Question relating to the provision of
infrastructure, why is it that other Hon
Members who are not in New Juaben
South and New Juaben North had relevant
questions to ask. I also had a relevant
question to ask even though I could not
catch the eye of the Speaker. So I think we
should really understand the import of
Question time.

Mr Cletus A. Avoka -rose—

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Majority Leader, I will come to you.

Hon Minority Leader, is supplementary
triggered by the main Question? ls a
supplementary question asked only after
a main Question had been asked? And
where the owner of the Question as it is
usually said, has not even asked it, and
no one has asked the Question on his
behalf, when some other Member wants
to ask a question, will he be asking the
main Question with regard to which no
permission has been granted by the
originator or will he be asking subsidiary
question?

I think we can look at it like this and
intellectually examine the problem.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
I see the path to the labyrinth that you are
constructing but I will not fall in that.
Mr Speaker, the issue is, a substantive
Question that has been duly admitted, I
am saying that, once it has been admitted,
it becomes the property of this House and
the person in whose name it is, if he says
he is not prepared to ask the Question, it
should be subject to the indulgence of
the House. That is the import of what I am
saying. That is all that I am saying.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Thank
you.

Mr Avoka: Mr Speaker, I thought that
the Hon Minority Leader should have
taken a cue from your very lucid ruling or
intervention.


[123] 

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: I did not
rule, I asked for guidance.

Mr Avoka: From your very lucid
intervention, I thought he would have
taken a cue from that to curtail the matter
and end it there. That is because, Mr
Speaker, if I ask a Question on the Minister
for Education about a school block in my
constituency and by the time that the
Question is ripe for hearing-- when the
Minister comes here, the Question for
which I was asking for an answer has been
resolved, the issue has been resolved, the
school building has been taken care of,
and I say I am satisfied and he says that
notwithstanding that one, people should
still ask questions on an issue that I who
know more about it-

I think that he is belabouring the point.
I think that he is manufacturing issues into
the House which are untenable. You can
liken this to presenting a case, in court
you go and file a notice of discontinuance
or they call the case and you say you are
no more interested and then somebody
says you should be compelled to
prosecute the case, I have not heard of
this before. 

We cannot compel people in this
Chamber to ask Questions that they had
earlier indicated because, if events have
been overtaken by time, there is no need
for him to ask the Question and nobody
can ask a Question about a school in my
village better than me when l have seen
that the school block I was complaining
about has been built or the interest has
been resolved. I do not think that it is
warrantable. 

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
with respect, 1 believe we can curtail this
but when you asked the person who filed
Question number 681 whether he was

[124]
satisfied, he said no, not necessarily. In
any event, who is telling the Majority
Leader that the project for the Institute of
Accountancy at Adenta is only for
residents of Adenta, who is telling him
that? He heard me. I am asking him that
who is suggesting to him that the Institute
of Accountancy located at Adenta is only
for residents at Adenta, who is telling him
that?

So it cannot be said by any stretch of
whose imagination that such a Question
can only be reserved for the person whose
name it is in, that is where -he is wrong.

Mr Speaker, but do not let us litigate it
further, I believe we can go on.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker:
Nevertheless, Hon Majority Leader, for
our future guidance, in view of the fact
that whenever a thing is laid, it is the
property of the House and also in View of
the fact that when a Question has been
asked, then another person will not file
‘for the same thing, we may as well want
to look at this issue for future guidance. I
believe we could, but under the present
dispensation I think we just have to end
at that stage.

Question numbered 682, standing in the
name of the Hon Member for Tema West.

Broken-down Sakumono Kindergarten
(Rebuilding)

Q.682. Mrs Irene Naa Torshie Addo:
Asked the Minister for Education when
the Sakumono Kindergarten which was
broken down by whirlwind in September,
2009 would be re-built since it has been
subsequently closed down. 

Mrs Betty Mould-Iddrisu: Mr
Speaker, as I have said, it is the
responsibility of the District, Municipal
and Metropolitan Assemblies to provide
infrastructural facilities for basic schools
in their Assemblies. However, the


[125] 

[MRS MOULD-IDDRISU] 

Ministry of Education makes a limited
provision in its budget to cater for the
underserved districts. Information
reaching the Ministry indicates that the
Assembly is in the process of
constructing a six-unit kindergarten
facility for the Sakumono community and
the Ministry would follow up on this.

I thank you. 

Mrs Torshie Addo: Mr Speaker, I am
not aware that the Assembly is building a
six-room unit for the kindergarten. In fact,
the building that is being put up is for the
primary school. The primary school
authorities have been told that come
January, they are going to stop the shift
system and move into that building and
they need every room in that building.

Indeed, the kindergarten was just a
three classroom block. So it cannot be the
one that has just been built which is about
six-classroom block with other facilities
which makes it a 12 to13-room block. The
two are not -the same. The kindergarten
block has not been put up.

Hon Minister, what is the Ministry
doing about my kindergarten block. The
facts are that there is no block being put
up for the kindergarten. What emergency
measures can the Ministry put up to
ensure that the three-class room block that
is supposed to be for the kindergarten is
put up? 

Mrs Mould-Iddrisu: Hon Member, as
earlier indicated, it is the responsibility of
the Assembly especially in respect of
providing infrastructure for basic schools
and kindergarten schools. I will liaise with
the Assembly to find out why the answer
they have given me is inaccurate. My
information from the Ministry of
Education is that, a 6-unit facility has been
put up for the Sakumono community.

Thank you --[Interruption]


[126]

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Order!
order.

Hon Member, please continue.

Mrs Torshie Addo: Hon Minister,
could you get the GETFund as part of the
emergency programme to  and solve
this problem for me? The kids have been
home, you and I are mothers and we know
what it is like. My kids have been home
for two years and it is a real, real problem
for me. tried to get them tables and chairs
for the teachers in the school with my
Common Fund but you know we do not
have enough and I do know that Ministry
of Education, you have a budget which
will still come here that has to be approved
by Members such as myself.

Please, do me this honour.

Thank you. 

11.30a.m.

Mrs Mould-Iddrisu: Mr Speaker, I
want to thank the Hon Member.

We will take this thing into
consideration.

Mr Yaw Owusu-Boateng: Mr Speaker,
when the Hon Minister for Education was
answering the Question, one of her
answers was that, a six-unit classroom
block was being built to replace the
kindergarten. 1 do not know_ when
kindergartens started having six-un1t
classroom blocks with ancillary facilities.
[Interruptions]

I think the Hon Minister herself should
have known that the information that she
had was wrong and so, she should ‘not
come here an lament about this thing.
This is because when did we have a six~
unit classroom block with ancillary
services for kindergarten?


Mrs Mould-Iddrisu: Mr Speaker, while
it is true that normally, we do have three-
unit kindergarten facilities,-it is quite
possible that this 1S a complex and it
involves others -- not only the
kindergarten but the  I stand by
this information until am corrected.

Mr Speaker, the Hon Member’s point
is taken though.

[127] 

Mexico Junior High School 
(Addressing infrastructural problems)

Q. 683. Mrs Irene Naa Torshie Addo
asked the Minister for Education what
plans the Ministry had to address the
infrastructural problems of the Mexico
Junior High School in the Tema West
Constituency in view of the adverse
findings in the geological report issued
on the school infrastructure between 2006
and 2008.

Mrs Betty Mould-Iddrisu:. Madam
Speaker, as I have stated earlier, it is the
responsibility of the District, Municipal
and Metropolitan Assemblies to provide
infrastructural facilities for basic schools
in their Assemblies, However, the Ministry
makes provision in its budget to cater for
those districts that are generally
underserved.

In 2006, the Ministry made provision
of GH¢25,000.00 in its GETFund budget
allocation for infrastructural improvement
of the Mexico Junior High School.
However, there were adverse findings in
the geological report, which made the
Assembly decide to relocate the school
to an entirely new site thus the allocation
was not utilised. The geological report, I
am informed, indicates that there is a fault
line running through that particular
location and it may adversely affect the
school building in case of any movement
of the earth.

A new site which is the responsibility
of the Assembly has not yet been
communicated to the Ministry of
Education for further action to be taken.

Mrs Torshie Addo: Mr Speaker, is the
Hon Minister aware or has she been
properly briefed that there is a likelihood
of a catastrophe as she just read herself,
should there be earth movement for the
school? The school children can lose their
lives? We are talking of over 800 children

[128]
in the school. The Hon Minister just said
in her report that she had been told that
there could be a problem when there is
earth movement.

What is the Ministry doing? Is the
Ministry going to continue to tell us that
the Assembly is responsible? Why do we
have the Ministry of Education? What is
the Ministry doing to save the lives of
the people in Tema West, particularly 
the children in Mexico Junior High
School?

Mrs Mould-Iddrisu: Mr Speaker, yes,
it is the responsibility, the primary
responsibility of the Assembly to ensure
that lives are not endangered. It is the
responsibility of the Ministry to act when
the Assembly is unable to find the
resources.

If the Assembly communicates this to
us, we will take the action to ensure that
there is no risk to the lives of the ‘dear
students at Mexico Junior High School in
Tema West.

Mrs Torshie Addo: Mr Speaker, has
the Hon Minister found out from the
Assembly what it is doing - She said in
her reply that the report was done in 2006.
It is five years to date; it is five good
years; is the Ministry going to wait for
the Assembly? ls it for those responsible
for the secondary - is she responsible
for the school in any way or the children?
For five years, is she going to continue to
wait for the Assembly to tell her
something? What is the Ministry of
Education doing about the situation?

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: The
sentence should be “Is the Hon Minister
going to wait?" Hon Members, I do not
like the use of pronouns in this House. It
should be, "Is the Hon Minister going to
wait"? So please, go on; I prefer that.


[l29] 

Mrs Torshie Addo: Mr Speaker, for
how long is the Ministry going to sit and
do nothing about it under the pretext that
if the Assembly cannot take care of it, it
will notify them? .What is the responsibility
of the Ministry in cases like this?

Mrs Mould-Iddrisu: Mr Speaker, I
have said it time and time again that the
responsibility is with the Assembly. If the
Assembly is unable-- Mr Speaker, I want
the Hon Member to know that this thing
happened in 2006, if the Assembly is
unable to take up that responsibility, they
should appropriately inform us, as
hundreds of Assemblies inform us and we
will then make every effort we can to assist
the Assembly.

As the Hon Member has informed me,
I am sure that a letter would be lying on
my desk from the Assembly as soon as I
get back and action would be taken.

Mm Torshie Addo: I do not know, Mr
Speaker—

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Minister, since Question time is also a time
of appropriate notification from the
Legislature to the Executive, you may
want to take appropriate notice and
actually contact the appropriate
Assembly and act thereon. This is
because I take this as a forum that is so
serious and that it is taken that you have
been duly informed.

Mrs Torshie Addo: Thank you, Mr
Speaker, I guess you took the wind out of
the sail.

I was going to tell the Hon Minister
that I filed this Question six months ago.
Indeed, we went on recess for almost four
months and the Ministry could have done
something –

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, if something has taken the wind
out of your sail then please, do not
attempt to say anything anymore because
you have no wind.

[130]

Mrs Torshie Addo: Very well, Mr
Speaker.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: If you
have any other question, you may ask.
Mrs Torshie Addo: Mr Speaker, my
last follow-up question is, is the GH¢25,000
being reserved for the Mexico Junior High
School still available, once the site is
found and when do they intend to prompt
the finding of that site?

11.4Oa.m.

Mrs Mould-Iddrisu: As I said, Mr
Speaker, when the request is made, I am
sure that we will be able to look for the
appropriate resources to fund it and I am
sure also that if it was GHc25,000 in 2006,
it must have gone up considerably by
now, so we would look at the situation.

Mrs Torshie Addo: Mr Speaker, just a
little aside.

I just want to prompt the Hon Minister
for Education that it has come to our
notice that there is some kind of private
participation that has come up. I think a
couple of people who went to the school
have come up and want to do something
but the Ministry has been delaying it and
I would like her to know about it. We can
talk about it afterwards.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, I would advise that you can
trigger action by writing to the Hon
Minister soon after this and then copying
the Assembly and then there could be
appropriate follow-up.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
in the Answer provided by the Hon
Minister, it says - that is the last sentence
in the last but one paragraph -- that the
geological report indicates that there is a
fault line running through the school
which may affect the school building in
case of any earth movement. 

[131] 


[MR KYEI-MENSAH-BONSU]

MI Speaker, I Want to find out from the
Hon Minister whether that is the correct
Answer and whether that is what she
wants to tell us- I see by the nodding of
her head that that is –

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, please go on. The Hon Minister
is not in a position now to speak.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
I know of two earth movements - the
rotation of the earth on its axis and the
revolution of the earth around the sun.
What has this got to do with fault lines?
Is the Hon Minister telling us about
movement in the crust of the earth or earth
movement?

Mrs Mould-Iddrisu: Mr Speaker, this
was taken from the geologist’s report;
these are not my words. These were taken
from the geologist’s report and I am not a
geologist. You know I am a lawyer. So I
stand by what was taken from the
geologist’s report.

Dr A. A. Osei: Mr‘ Speaker, any
geologist that uses this term, we should
have reason to question his or her
credibility and therefore the basis for
submitting that report. An earthquake is
an earthquake. For a geologist to use this.
term to mislead the Hon Minister to
mislead this House –

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, are you expressing an opinion?

Dr A. A. Osei: No, Mr Speaker. It is a
matter of fact. It is not earth movement.
There is a technical term; it is not earth
movement. So that geologist, the Hon
Minister should call him or her to her office
and ask him or her Why he or she is leading
her to mislead this House or correct the
report. 

[132]

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: You are
suggesting. an appropriate correction
should be made; you are bringing that to
the Hon Minister’s attention.

I thank you very much.

Hon Minister, do you take that in good
faith to pursue and possibly correct it?

Mrs Mould-Iddrisu: Mr Speaker, with
the greatest’s of respect, this was taken
from the geologist report between 2006
and 2008. Therefore, we stand by what
was in the geologist’s report.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
with respect, the Hon Minister in reading
the Answer to us even read ‘movement
of the earth". She did not even say "earth
movement". Either way, it is wrong. This
is not a matter for geologists. Earth
movement is a subject matter for
geographers. Geologists talk about
movements in the earth’s crusts, the
crusts of the earth and I believe that is
what she meant.

Mr Speaker, there is a world of
difference and I believe that the Hon
Minister does not intend to mislead this
House. She does not intend to do that.
Those cannot be the words from a
geologist - [Interruption]

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Order. I
believe if the Hon Minister had taken a
cue, we would have ended this.

Hon Minister, you know, in this House,
we have Hon Members who are versatile,
virtually extending from archaeology to
zoology. So if any suggestion should be
made, I think an Hon Minister can follow
that up.

Mrs Mould Iddrisu -- rose –

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Minister; you would be seated for now till
I call you. 


[133] 

[MR SECOND DEPUTY SPEAKER]

An Hon Minister may - Order!

Hon Members, we continue to learn.
Please, let there be order.

If a suggestion is made in such a
circumstance where we know some Hon
Member has some knowledge or expertise
or other, I think the way to curtail the
matter is for the Hon Minister, whoever it
may be, to follow this up later and be
advised accordingly, then we end it up.
But definitely, you are not going to say
that because some expert may have made
some mistake somewhere then that is that.
That is all the difference.

So Hon Minister, I think you can
appropriately respond and we end that
matter.

Mrs Mould-Iddrisu: I thank you very
much for your intervention, Mr Speaker.
Your point is very well noted.

"However, in this particular case, I have
an expert’s report and with the greatest of
respect, I do not know that the Hon
Minority Leader is a geophysist; or what is
it? Geo biibi - [Laughten] Geologist,
geo-whatever. I do not know that so that
I would take his word over a report that
has been commissioned and written by
experts.

However, I have taken your advice and
I would note the matter.

I thank you.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Thank
you very much.

Mrs Akosua F. Osei-Opare - rose –

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Yes, Hon
Member, do you want to ask a question?

Mrs Osei-Opare: Yes, Mr Speaker,
concerning the Mexico School. The Hon
Minister’s written Answer and her

[134]
subsequent answers insist that "if she is
informed", "if the Assembly tells her".

The question that I want to ask is that,
what is the responsibility of the Ministry
of Education in ensuring that all children
in every part of the country have access
to education in relation to the answers that
she has given concerning the Mexico
School? What is the responsibility of the
Ministry, so that we are clearly informed
of - When there is an infrastructural
problem or when there is a problem, what
can we expect of the Ministry?

11.50 a.m.

Mrs Mould-Iddrisu: Mr Speaker, I am
rather surprised because I thought that
the question had been very adequately
answered in my earlier interventions.

Mr Speaker, provision of basic
education infrastructure is a shared
responsibility between the Ministry of
Education and the District Assemblies.
They have the primary responsibility, and
for that matter, Hon Members themselves.

As soon as the matter comes to our
attention, we will intervene. This is not
the first time nor will it be the last time.
There have been so many instances,
where Hon Members themselves have
drawn it to the attention of the Minister
or the Ministry and We have taken.

Primary responsibility lies with the
Assemblies; we always step in when the
Assemblies are unable or incapable or
under-resourced to provide the
infrastructure.

Your point is well taken, Hon Member,
and we will continue action on this matter.

Mrs Osei-Opare: Mr Speaker -
[Interruption]

Dr A. At Osei - rose –



[135] 

Mrs Osei-Opare: Hon Akoto Osei,
can you take your seat‘? I am on the floor,
I have accepted it, and I like the name.

Mr Moses A. Asaga_- rose –

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Asaga was querying me –

Mr Asaga: Yes, thank you -
[Interruptions.]

Mrs Osei-Opare: No, I have the floor,
I have been recognised.

Mr Speaker, you called Hon Frema Osei
and not Hon Asaga, the Hon Member
does not bear the name.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, I thought -you had satisfied
yourself.

Mrs Osei-Opare: No, I needed
clarification.

 Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Very well,
continue, complete; after that, Hon Asaga.
No problem.

Mrs, Osei-Opare: Mr Speaker, the
Hon Minister said that this is a shared
responsibility. As she rightly pointed out
in her Answer, there has been a report
from 2006 to 2008 and we are now in 2011.
A Question has been filed, and the
Assembly, as she rightly said, has not
brought it to her attention. That is the
basis of my question.

What is the mandatory role of her
Ministry in ensuring that that Assembly
has acted in the way that they should act
to ensure that the good children of Ghana,
who have been entrusted in her hands,
have access to education?

Really, it is not enough for the Ministry
to say that it has not been brought to their

[136]

attention. Their attention has been drawn
through the Question and therefore I
expected more from the Ministry in terms
of ensuring that the Assembly does its
work in connection with the vision and
the mission of her Ministry. This is a
Question that has been filed, so attention
has been drawn - [Interruption] 

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Order

Mrs Mould-Iddrisu: I thank you for
this intervention.

I think it is well known that the Ministry
of Education has oversight responsibility
over the district education offices. The
Ministry of Local Government and Rural
Development has oversight responsibility
over the District and Municipal
Assemblies. Our responsibilities are
obviously mutually intertwined and we
have been conducting them as such.

I want to assure you that any
Assembly that brings these matters to our
notice, or any of the District Education
Directors who brings matters such as
these to our notice, they will be promptly
dealt with.

Mr Asaga: Mr Speaker, thank you very
much.

There was a little bit of confusion to
the name Frema and Asaga, I wish she
had taken the Asaga because it is related
to an A-rating. That is the positive aspect
-- [Laughter.]

Mr Speaker, the question I want to ask
is that in the shared responsibility that
the Hon Minister indicated, Members of
Parliament (M.Ps) have been receiving
GETFund allocation. Is it possible that
Members of Parliament also have a
mandate to support schools in their
districts especially, District Assemblies-
And the Hon Members who asked the
questions, I want to know whether they
have used their GETFund to support the
Assembly -- [Interruptions.]



[l37]

Mr. Torshie Addo --rose - .

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Asaga, you were making a statement and
not asking a question.

Mr Frederick Opare-Ansah ~-~ rose
Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Minority Chief Whip, if only you are
asking a question and not making a
statement.

Mr Opare-Ansah: Unlike H0nAsaga,
I am asking a question. 

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Very well
ask a question. 

Mr Opare-Ansah: Mr Speaker, I would
like to find out from the Minister for
Education –

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: And that
is the final one.

Mr Opare-Ansah: I would like to refer
her to the Budget Statement of the
Economic Policy of the Government of
Ghana for 2011. Paragraph 497 - and the
heading of that paragraph, Mr Speaker, is
Primary and Junior High School,
Education". Mr Speaker, with your
permission I quote, it says that:

"Madam Speaker, to further expand
and improve upon educational
infrastructure, the Ministry will
continue to upgrade basic school
infrastructure including the
programme to‘ eliminate ‘schools
under trees.’

Mr Speaker, I further went to look at
the programmes under the Ministry for
Local Government and Rural
Development. Indeed, there are only two
references to education under the
Ministry of Local Government and Rural

[138]
Development. One is the School Feeding
Programme and the other has to do with
community-based, technical and
vocational training institutes.

Mr Speaker, since when did the Minister
for Education realise that responsibility for
the construction of basic school
infrastructure lies with the -Ministry of Local
Government and Rural Development?

Mrs Mould-Iddrisu Mr Speaker, It is
well known that education in all the
districts in the country are shared
responsibilities between the Assemblies
and the Ministry of Education and the
Members of Parliament.

I thank you.

12.00 noon

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, I think this will bring us to the
end of Question time.

Hon Minister, thank you very much for
attending to the House and answering
our questions. We appreciate it.

Item 4 - Statement; there is a Statement
on the strike action of Doctors standing
in the name of the Hon Member for
Asawase.

STATEMENTS

Strike by Members of the Ghana
a Medical Association (GMA)

Alhaji Mohammed-Mubarak Muntaka
(NDC -- Asawase): Thank you, Mr
Speaker, for the opportunity to make this
Statement on the strike action by the
members of the Ghana Medical
Association (G M A). 

Mr Speaker, Doctors in our public
hospitals across the country have for the
past three weeks been on strike due to--
among others, the inability of the Fair



[139] 

[ALHAJI MUNTAKA]

Wages and Salaries Commission (FWSC)
to migrate them onto the Single Spine
Salary Structure.

Mr Speaker, the Parliamentary Select
Committee on Health met with the GMA
on 18th October, 2011 to ascertain the
issues at stake with a view to helping to
resolve the impasse.

MI Speaker, the grievances enumerated
by the GMA during the meeting include:

1. The grade structure of the FWSC
with regard to the position of
medical doctors (Clinicians)
which confuses administrative
positions and technical positions;

2. Market premium of medical
doctors; and

3. Additional duty hours undertaken.

The GMA disagrees with the grade
structure in relation to other grades in the
health sector. In their opinion, the grade
structure should correspond to the job-
evaluation scores agreed upon at a
meeting with the FWSC. 

They are also not in favour of the
promotional pattern as presented by the
FWSC because it affects their progression
in the health sector.

Mr Speaker, the disagreement in the
market premium among others is the
reason the doctors are still on strike.

The GMA observed that most of the
persons negotiating with them were
without adequate mandate and therefore
could not adequately address the issue.


[140]

Mr Speaker, Parliament, through the
work of the Parliamentary Select
Committee on Health, recognises the
issues which occasioned the strike.
Notwithstanding, Parliament is of the
candid opinion that the problem can be
resolved.

Trust should be fostered during the
negotiation period between the
stakeholders and efforts should be made
at mending bridges While looking into the
future with hope. The Committee prays
for all the stakeholders to enter into the
engagement with candour and sufficient
mandate for the impasse to come to an
end with a win-win situation rather than a
win-lose situation.

Unfortunately, Mr Speaker, in the midst
of the strike by the Doctors, lives have
been imperilled, including deaths which
could have been avoided. The Military and
Police Hospitals as well as private
hospitals have seen a rise in the number
of patients . In the face of this, Parliament,
Without prejudice to the demands of the
striking doctors, call on the GMA to
consider returning to work while engaging
in further negotiations.

Dr Matthew Opoku Prempeh (NPP --
Manhyia): Mr Speaker, I rise to support
the Statement made by the Hon Member
of Parliament for Asawase and the
Chairman of the Parliamentary Select
Committee on Health.

Indeed, Mr Speaker, I was part of the
group that met with the Leadership of
GMA. Mr Speaker, it is sad that the strike
had entered the third week in this country.
It should not be and it should never
happen again in this country that doctors
are seen to be striking for such a long
period of time.

Strike itself is nothing new, Mr Speaker.
All over the world in every jurisdiction,


[141] 

[DR PREMPEH] 

whether it is doctors or policemen, at times
they do strike. The resolution of these
strikes, is what is important; and the speed
at which these strikes are resolved is what
is very, very important.

Mr Speaker, when the Health Select
Committee met with the doctors only
three issues came up and it is instructive
to note the doctors are not the ones
clamouring to be on the Single Spine
Salary Structure. Mr Speaker, it is not the
doctors who engaged the services of the
consultants to put their additional duty
hours at such a high peg. Mr Speaker, it
is even more interesting that as far back
as 1998, under the National Democratic
Congress (NDC) Government, doctors
were given two hundred additional
working hours a week. 

Mr Speaker, again, it is not the doctors
who refused to agree to the market
premium that had been set. Mr Speaker,
it is not the doctors who had refused to
accept what has been given. The most
important thing, Mr Speaker, is the fact
that the doctors claimed that people
Without sufficient mandate are being
brought to sit down with them, and even
when they agree, the people come back
and say that "We cannot even agree to
what we seem to have agreed upon". Mr
Speaker, this has led to the breakdown of
trust between the negotiators and the
stakeholders.

Mr Speaker, it is not the doctors who
decided to sack essential staff with the
FWSC which has led to this quagmire. Mr
Speaker, it is not the doctors who have
caused all other sectors of this country
who have even been migrated onto the
SSSS to be agitating. Mr Speaker, it is not
the doctors’ fault that the salary structure
that is up to twenty-five grades – the


[142]
junior -- most doctors start at grade 21. It
is not the doctors who put themselves on
such a high peg. Indeed, it is not the
doctors who have decided what they want
it is the Government through the PWSC
that has not been able to commit
themselves to what has been agreed to.

Mr Speaker, it is sad: It is really, really
sad, as a doctor myself, to find out that
for three weeks, doctors are still on strike.
But it is not the doctors who went on air
to say, "If you do not go back to work,
you can resign." Mr Speaker, it is not the
doctors who decided to call themselves
"murderers", or for that matter--- In a
striking atmosphere, I would beg that the
whole country resolve that their speech
be moderate. It is strike time; it is not
right for irresponsible statements to be
made.

Mr Speaker, I would like, in the spirit of
this House, to appeal to the striking
doctors to go back to work. That appeal I
would want to back it with a fact ---
[Interruption.] Mr Speaker, in that spirit
I would like to appeal to the Government
to speedily resolve this issue and resolve
it amicably. This is because the
negotiations will not end up today; it
will come up tomorrow and tomorrow’s
next. And the better trust is engendered
today, the better it is for the future of this
country.

Mr Speaker, thank you.

Mr Alex Tettey-Eny0 (NDC -Ada):
Mr Speaker, I thank you for the
opportunity to contribute to the Statement
by the Member of Parliament for Asawase
and the Chairman of the Parliamentary
Select Committee on Health on the strike
action by doctors of the GMA. 

The national concern for the fallout of
the ongoing strike by the Members is so
high that it is incumbent on this House to



[143] 

[MR TETTEY-ENYO] 

add its voice to the appeal to the
Association to go back to work while
negotiations continue.

I have always contended that the best
thing members of any union can do in the
circumstances in which the members of
the GMA find themselves, is to follow the
procedures allowed by negotiation, the
authority given to institutions set up to
mediate within the circumstances of the
dissent or discontent put out by the labour
unions so that we create confidence in
the systems we have established to deal
with _issues that pertain to labour
dissatisfaction.

I am sorry that the process of-
[Interruption.]

l2.l0p.m.

Dr A. A. Osei -rose – 

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, are you standing on a point of
order? 

Dr A. A. Osei: Mr Speaker, I just
want to bring your attention to something.

The Chairman of the Parliamentary
Select Committee on Health has made a
very important Statement for this House
to consider, and look at him ‘standing back
there having a meeting. How does he
want us to take his Statement seriously?
This is a very serious matter; he should
be sitting here. Mr Speaker, I am surprised
at him. This matter is too serious for him
to be standing there. 

I thank you, Mr Speaker.

Mr Tettey-Enyo: Mr Speaker, indeed,
I agree with the Hon Member of Parliament
who has raised the issue that we should
all be concerned and pay attention to the
Statement on floor and the last person to

[144]

show disregard would be the Chairman of
the Select Committee on Health. So I am
happy he is back in his seat.

Mr Speaker, We are concerned,
especially when the" avenues open for us
are being used but rather in a very slow
manner, intensifying the effects that are
coming out of the strike action. I think
the purpose of this Statement is to enable
Parliament, this noble House, to express
its opinion about what is happening, and
like the other institutions in this country,
appeal to members of the GAM to go back
to work.

A lot of people who spoke on radio, or
television about the effects of this strike
action pointed out to the fact that the
matter would be resolved -- and indeed
it would be resolved.

But the point is, we have to speed up
the action to resolve it so that we end the
effects that are taking place. Indeed, I
know Hon Members on both sides of the
House will support this Statement and will
bring up ideas which would enable us to
add our voice in a very strong manner so
that the members of the Association
would heed our call and go back to work
while we support them in seeking redress
for their grievances before the institutions
where this matter is being considered.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Thank
you very much, Hon Member.

Papa Owusu-Ankomah (NPP -
Sekondi): Thank you Very much, Mr
Speaker, for the opportunity to contribute
to this Statement and to commend the
Chairman of this l-louse’s Select
Committee on Health for making this
Statement, particularly considering the
fact that this is the second day of the
Meeting of this House for the Third
Session of this Parliament.




[145] 

[PAPA OWUSU-ANKOMAH]

Mr Speaker, strikes will always occur.
Indeed, this is not the first time that
medical doctors have gone on strike.
However, it is also important to emphasise
that for medical doctors to go on strike, it
means that they consider it to be the last
resort, knowing the consequences of the
strike action they take. 

Mr Speaker, reading the Statement of _
the Hon Member, a point is made that it
seems those who engage in the
negotiations do not seem to have the
authority to take a final decision. That is
also symptomatic of the way things are
organised in this country. I personally
have had the benefit of being engaged in
discussions with groups that were on
strike.

It is important that on these matters
the State recognises that there is the need
for finality so that those who go to
negotiate feel confident that they have the
full mandate to take a decision.

It has happened to me before. Yes, one
does not have the final decision and one
may agree tentatively, people are happy,
then one goes back and they say "No, we
cannot handle this". So it is important
that all those Who are in a position to give
clearance should be at the table. I agree
we have processes but it gets to a stage
we do not need to go through the entire
process. All those who are involved can
be there so that finality can be brought to
these negotiations. 

It is also important, particularly, having
regard to what has been going on all over
the world, to state that probably, as the
political leadership, there is the need for
us to have some introspection. Just a
couple of Weeks ago, when the UN
Secretary-General, His Excellency Ban Ki-
moon had occasion to address the Inter
Parliamentary Union (IPU) General
Assembly, he made the comment that with

[146]

the tumult going round the world
probably it was symptomatic of a deficit
of trust of the people in political leadership -
trust deficit. So probably they do not
believe that political leadership is sincere
in whatever they are saying or doing.

So I take this opportunity to urge this
House and each and every Member
Thereof to recognise that having come this
far as a democracy, when it comes to
certain things, there cannot be winners
and there cannot be losers and there is no
need for anyone to desire to take partisan
political advantage of a serious situation.

The people would be asking, "having
had democracy for so long, what benefit
has it brought to me as an individual”? So
the practice of democracy must "be
positively reflected in the lives of our
people. That is the challenge to us as
leadership.

Having said this, I would urge all
parties, not only the Doctors -All parties
involved in this matter should Work
assiduously to ensure that this matter is
resolved as soon as possible if not
immediately.

To my brothers the doctors, there
comes a time when individuals even Where
they believe they are being mistreated,
look at the bigger picture and say that,
"having regard to the circumstances of
this matter I believe that I ought to go a
further step and sacrifice in the interest of
the nation". This is what is being
demanded of doctors this morning.

Having said that, Mr Speaker, it is also
important that we commend the work
being done by the hospitals where doctors
are dealing with emergencies and I urge
the Government to ensure that the urgent
needs of these hospitals are met. I have
reason to say this because I have
interacted with some of the senior
members of these institutions. 


[147] 

[PAPA OWUSU-ANKOMAH]

There is pressure. And there is the need
for medical supplies to be given them
urgently. Let us cut the bureaucracy now.
In times of war, we do not deal with
bureaucracy. Things that can take three
months ought to be dealt with in a day
and that is what is required of
Government now.

I pray that sooner rather than later, this
unfortunate situation will end, and after it
is ended, all of us will learn lessons out of
it so that the next time things do not
deteriorate to this level. 

I thank you, Mr Speaker. [Hear! Hear!]

12.20 p.m.

Minister for Women and Children’s
Affairs (Mrs Juliana Azumah-Mensah):
Mr Speaker, I would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate the Hon
Member who made this very important
Statement.

Mr Speaker, when the strike action
started, I, through the Ministry of Women
and Children’s Affairs, put out an SOS call
to our doctors to try and go to the
negotiating table while they work. This is
because as we know, when one is in the
hospital and doctors or nurses go on
strike, the very first thing that comes to
mind - I have been in that position
because I have been in the hospital. I am
a nurse; I am midwife.

The first thing that happens, is that
when women are in labour and there are
complications, when sick children _are
brought in, the nurses and other auxiliary
staff can do their best but when the
doctors are not there, what we have is
deaths of these women who cannot take
control of their own labour. We know that
in the hospitals, it is not only the doctors


[148]

who are the only health workers. Within
the hospital, they work as a team--
doctors, nurses, pharmacists and ancillary
workers -- to make the work holistic. I
believe where there is discontent, we must
take to consideration, the lives of people
who come to hospital who may, as a result
of the strike action, meet their untimely
demise. 

So, in actual fact, a woman, who is
nearing the state of labour when she hears
that doctors are on strike, it is very, very
frightening. So, I believe a lot is being
done to actually meet the doctors on the
negotiating table. But I believe also that
for the doctors to really go back and visit
their Hippocratic Oath, they should take
the lives of those people in the hospitals
into consideration. They may not be dead
but the morbidity and the mortality that
can come as a result of the strike action, I
believe, they should look at that carefully
so that they return to the hospitals and
the clinics while negotiations are going
on. I know.

I have been there; I am a nurse as I
said before. We cannot pay the health
professional enough for what they do, but
that does not mean that we should use
the general public, women and children
especially as pawns when we are fighting
for when we need; our allowances and
salaries.

So, again on this platform, as woman
and as the Hon Minister for Women and
Children’s Affairs, and also as a woman
who has a husband, an uncle and
everybody to appeal to our colleagues,
the doctors to try and be a little bit
altruistic, that is put themselves in the
shoes of those who are visiting the
hospitals who need their services so that
they go back to the hospitals to work while
the negotiations go on.
 


[l49] 

[MRS AZUMAH-MENSAH]
 
So on this note, Mr Speaker, others
have said it all. We are behind them for
what they do but I believe that when one
is standing for something good and it goes
too far, then everybody stands against
that person. So, we will be very happy for
them to go back to work while
negotiations go on.

Thank you, Mr Speaker.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Thank
you, very much.

I have an advice list from Leadership,
which I am going by, just for the
information of Hon Members.

12.3Op.m.

Mrs Frema Osei-Opare (NPP -
Ayawaso West Wuogon): Mr Speaker, I
would like to associate myself with the
Statement made concerning the strike of
our medical personnel, particularly, the
doctors.

Mr Speaker, it is important to recognise
that, as a nation, through the Labour Act,
we have all agreed that the rights of
workers must be respected in accordance
with our association with the world.
Particularly, if I look at the Labour Act, it
does require that workers and employees
do meet regularly to negotiate conditions
of service.

Mr Speaker, the principle behind the
FWSC was again put together by this
House to ensure that there is equity and
fairness in the remuneration for our public
sector workers. Indeed, the Act that this
august House passed -- the Fair Wages
and Salaries Commission Act -- in that
Act was enshrined a grievance committee,
and that was put there deliberately to
ensure among other committees that they
will set, there is in place a grievance


[150]

committee such that when there is a
problem, there will be timely process in
terms of dealing with it. We put that Act
together. That was to ensure that we do
not get into the kind of situation that we
have.

Again, the evidence even as put out
by the Hon Member who made the
Statement is that, the doctors are availing
themselves of the proper processes of
negotiation and therefore it is important
that Government, which has also set out
regulations should also honour those
systems that have been put in place to
ensure that there is understanding and
that the process is carried forward under
the whole Act that we have put together.

Mr Speaker, in negotiating, the Hon
Member for Sekondi said that there are
times that we have even varied the
composition in order to ensure timely
resolution. Indeed, this is an experience
that in my former role as a Hon Deputy
Minister for Manpower and Employment,
we were faced with such situations
whereby parties were put together. I know
the Ghanaian temperament. -We are people
of peace and that when people are heard
and given a voice and we meet people
with respect, with understanding, with
tolerance, we are able to resolve -what may
look like an impossible situation.

I am urging that with this impasse, all
parties, particularly Government side,
approach this problem with understanding
and with words and posture that are inviting,
encouraging the kind of motherly attitude
such that whatever we agree on, even if we
are unable to give in to their demands, we
would be able to have ensured that the
people know that we are not doing it out of
spite, but we are doing it because of the
circumstances that we find ours elves at the
time.

 

[151] 

[MRS OSEI-OPARE]

Mr Speaker, three weeks have passed
and we think that it is only death, but it is
incumbent on us to realise that timely
access to medical services can help you
in the future. There are situations
whereby if you do not see a doctor today,
you are committed to some permanent
situation which could have been
prevented. It is important for us to realise
that even in trying to improve our maternal
and child care, one of the things that we
say is that, it is important that we have
urgent support and a little delay in
problems at home.

What I have seen happening with
Members of Parliament (MPs) using their
National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS)
support is that, a lot of MPs are buying
ambulances. Why are we doing that? We
are doing that because we recognise that
if people are sick, that time delayed can
cause problems and that is why we as
representatives of the people, are
investing in ambulances. But when you
have bought these ambulances and they
get to the hospital and there is no doctor,
what have we done?

12.30p.m.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, begin to wind up. 

Mrs Osei-Opare: I am winding up, Mr
Speaker. What happens to our effort as
the Women Caucus of Parliament of
Ghana in getting the maternity theatre
rehabilitated so that women who have
difficult child birth can have access to
theatre facilities –

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: And in
conclusion –

Mrs Osei-Opare: If they get there
and there is nobody, what is the use? All
I am saying, Mr Speaker, is that this is an
emergency, it requires emergency

[152]

response and I plead with our doctors to
go back to full work. But I also plead more
with Government, that the ball is in their
court; they can do a lot by having a
fatherly and motherly attitude to bring
them on board and that a calm word can
kill any sore.

Minister for Health  Joseph Yieleh
Chireh): Mr Speaker, let me first of all
thank the Hon Member for making the
Statement and urging the parties in this
negotiation to do their utmost for a
solution to be reached. 

Of course, we all know that this strike
action is very unfortunate and that is why
I would again also appreciate those
opinion leaders, whether political,
traditional or religious, who have joined
the President to ask the doctors to go back
to work while we go on with negotiations.

The Statement as made is to let all of
us appreciate the difficulties. But at the
same time, I have to state that the
Committee claims they met only the GMA
And the GMA statement being made about
people not being given sufficient mandate
- I wish the Committee could have the
opportunity of also meeting with the or
even the management of these
institutions. 

But once that has not happened, all we
are appealing to everybody is that as we
all listen every morning-- some of the
radio stations, after the visit of President
Obama-~ would say that we should build
strong institutions and not strong men;
everyday you would hear it. Therefore, if
this Parliament passes a law establishing
bodies, I expect all of us to be making sure
that these bodies are strong and not
individuals. We must make sure that
these bodies work. 

One thing more: What I would ask all
Ghanaians, no matter who you are, is that
for democracy to work, we must also



[153] 

[MR CHIREH]

exercise a lot of restraint and patience. It
is not right that you think you enjoy a
benefit and it must be given to you
immediately. 

So once again, we are appealing to the
doctors. As we talk, there is supposed to
be compulsory arbitration by the Labour
Commission with the parties. It means that
we are following procedures. Sometimes
the delays may be very, very unfortunate,
but they are necessary for the sanity of
public discourse, for all of us to appreciate.

The loss of lives is unfortunate and
again, as I always say and I would say
again, it is not how many times you insult
and tell people what your feelings are; it
is for us to be responsible, each and every
one of us, Therefore, I would again thank
all of you for showing this concern and
appeal once more as the President has
already done, to the medical doctors to
go back to work. The systems will work.

Mr Speaker, in terms of support for the
emergency centres that are carrying on
the duties while they are on strike, the
Ministry is not employing bureaucratic
methods. Indeed, we are making sure that
the medical suppliers are quickly delivered
to 37 Military Hospital and the Police
Hospital in Accra and in the other regions.
Government is aware that emergencies are
required to be treated there.

So we are not going to employ any
difficulties in terms of medical supplies.
The President himself was on the site to
ensure that these things are done. We
are going to make sure to save as many
lives as we can. But to this House once
more, thank you for showing the concern.

12.40p.m.

Dr Kofi Asare (NPP-Akwatia): Mr
Speaker, I want to commend the Chairman
of the Parliamentary Select Committee on
Health for making this Statement about
the doctors’ strike.

[154]

Mr Speaker, it takes a lot of thinking, a
lot of hard search and with much difficulty
for doctors to start a strike action. It is
not done lightly at all. Doctors resort to
strike action when all other means as far
as they see have been closed and it is not
a pleasant situation for the doctors and
for the patients.

Mr Speaker, health is said to be an
essential service with many others. I
always wonder what is there for those in
the essential services that they should not
go on strike. Is it just the label of being in
the essential service or there is something
that ought to go with it so that their
services are recognised as essential I
would think that governments should
make effort to show them at least, what it
takes that they are essential and therefore
have to forfeit their strike action.

When I was in the leadership of the
Association, I really did not see anything
that made health essential apart from the
fact that it was Written and it was said that
we were in the essential services. But I
believe if there is something that goes with
it, that would satisfy most doctors. 

Mr Speaker, when doctors resort to
strike action, one of the things that
infuriates and gets them adamant to what
people say is the insults and others that
come from supposed commentators and
senior journalists. It does not help in any
way; it does not. So I would plead with all
those who have the opportunity of talking
on radio and other media to be very
watchful of what they say and imply.

Calling doctors "mass murderers",
"thieves", "robbers", "criminals", does
not help in the negotiation. To some, we
just take it as it comes but there are others
who are very sensitive to these things and
it makes them adamant to any reason.
 


[155] 


[DR ASARE]
So please, we will urge those who make
comments to be very mindful of what they
say.

Mr Speaker, I would also say that one
of the things that in negotiation really sets
-us back is having agreed, then you find
that, that person did not have the final
say in what you have agreed on and
therefore‘ it is subject to change and that
change is not even referred back to the
team. Obviously, when those things
happen, there is loss of trust and I will
urge Government that they take those who
can take decision and put those decisions
into effect at this stage to be on the team
so that things can come to a fruitful end
as soon as possible.

Mr Speaker, my main concern about
this and the commentary and others is the
wedge that is being driven between
various sections of the Ghana Health
Service by commentators, playing one
against the other. The doctors against
the nurses, nurses-against pharmacists
and pharmacists against other health
workers. Mr Speaker, that would not augur
well for our health delivery service. After
the strike, they would need to work as a
team, but if you drive a wedge between
them, there would be so much distrust that
it would not in any way help in patient
management. 

So I would plead with those who for
some reasons known to them and for
myopic political gains, do these things
that they be advised by their heads -
their political seniors to stop and stop
immediately because that will in the long
run lead to poor health delivery for our
people.

Mr Speaker, I think a lot has been said,
let me also add my voice and appeal to
members of the Ghana Medical

[156]

Association, especially government
hospital doctors to resume work and
continue with the negotiation. I believe
they themselves are not happy being at
home, they themselves are not happy
about What they are seeing but it comes a
time you need to take those decisions. But
we would plead with them that their point
has been made and Government, I believe,
is working assiduously to meet their
demands and we would plead that they
would resume work without further delay.
Thank you Mr Speaker.

Minority Leader (Mr Osei Kyei-
Mensah-Bonsu): Mr Speaker, just a few
words. I was really not minded to make an
intervention because I think the various
issues have been articulated sufficiently.
But Mr Speaker, given the fact that it is a
very serious matter confronting this
nation, I am moved to say just a few
words.

Mr Speaker, yesterday, when the House
resumed from our recess,_ the Hon
Majority Leader and I had a discussion,
we thought that this House should
express concern about the strike action
that the doctors are engaged in. We
agreed that as a House, we should, in
addressing this issue, steer a middle
course. Mr Speaker, I narrated yesterday
an incident involving the daughter of one
Mr Haruna, a polling station chairman in
my constituency, whose daughter
transitioned when she was to deliver at
the Komfo Anokye Teaching Hospital,

Mr Speaker, I do not know of other
such incidents that might have happened
in the backyards of some of our Hon
Colleagues in this Chamber. I believe that
if we should do a count, we would have
many people who might have perished or
have their lives imperiled during the course
of this strike action.

Mr Speaker, the Committee on Health
in this House, unknown to us, had acted
proactively and engaged the GMA and I

[157] 

[MR KYEI MENSAH-BONSU]

thought-that was very, very fruitful-
Ordinarily, Committees would want
referrals to be made to them before they
Start acting. I think the action of the Health
Committee is very, very commendable.

Mr Speaker, from their engagement
with the GMA, we now know, this House
knows that there are three main issues that
the medical officers have raised. One is
the grade structure of the medical officers,
the market premium of medical doctors and
additional duty hours undertaken by them.

Mr Speaker, I think as a nation, we
should understand that the market
premium on medical officers has really
gone very, very high. In the United
Kingdom, the United States of America
and Canada, many brilliant minds no
longer want to pursue courses in
medicine.


This is because, now Information
Communication Technology (ICT) is a
greener area, most science students are
gravitating towards pursuing courses in
ICT. They have shorter duration and they
earn much higher than medical officers
who spend five or six years in school.

Mr Speaker, it is why in the United
Kingdom, in the United States of America
and in Canada today, we have an influx of
medical officers from India to the health
facilities of these countries. As we do
know, the start-off pay in the UK for
general practitioners (GPs) who are newly~
recruited is in the region of 5,500 pounds
which translates to close to 150 million
old Ghana cedis or GH¢l5,000. Mr
Speaker, as a nation, we should look at
this and if no push is given to the medical
officers, Ghana will be very much
disadvantaged.


[158]

Notwithstanding, we
should also know that as a nation, we are
not in the position to remunerate the
medical officers sufficiently, just like the
other professions can also not be paid
adequately enough. So it is really a
difficult situation. that as a nation we find
ourselves in.

I do know that no Government will sit
down unconcerned in the face of any
strike action by medical officers. So I want
to believe that Government will be
purposed to resolve this crisis and that is
why the side kicks of inflammatory
language would not help to resolve the
matter at all.

Mr Speaker, already, people, in
particular the Chairman who made the
Statement, Dr Matthew Opoku Prempeh
and my Colleague the Hon Member for
Sekondi (Papa Owusu-Ankomah) have all
spoken about a deficit of trust in the
negotiation process and I believe we have
to reconstruct it so that people will believe
in the institutions. This is because the
Hon Minister responsible said, re-echoing
what President Obama told us, that we
should build strong institutions and not
strong personalities. Where you have
built strong institutions, if trust cannot
be engendered, certainly, we would not
make any progress.

So it is important that tied in to this, we
must ensure that people can trust in the
system, people can trust in the institutions
and if there is no deficit of trust, then
people who go to the negotiation will be
clear in their minds that whatever is
decided on will be implemented. That
people have been sufficiently clothed
with the authority to come to the
negotiations and whatever comes from
them would certainly be implemented.


Mr Speaker, as the Hon Minister said,
and as I have also alluded to, lives that
are being lost, and people entering into
crisis situations in their health situations



[159]
[MR KYEI-MENSAH-BONSU]

cannot be good for this country. That is
why as a House, we must plead with the
medical officers that they should return
to the negotiations while adequate and
urgent steps are taken to resolve-the crisis
confronting all of us as a nation.

Mr Speaker, I thank you for this
opportunity.

Majority Leader (Mr Cletus Apul
Avoka): Mr Speaker, I thank you for the
opportunity to contribute to this
Statement.

Mr Speaker, this is a national problem
that cuts across various districts and
constituencies and for that matter political
parties in the country. I am therefore
happy that Parliament is looking at this
issue in a very bipartisan manner to be
able to resolve the impasse.

Mr Speaker, somebody would ask, "but
the doctors went on strike about two to
three weeks ago, why are we Members of
Parliament making a Statement today"? It
is important to put on record that at the
time that they were on strike we were on
recess and it was only yesterday that we
resumed our activity in Parliament and
that explains why even a day after
assuming duties in Parliament, we are
making this Statement.

Mr Speaker, I want to _ take this
opportunity to commend the
Parliamentary Select Committee on Health
for being proactive by intervening and
meeting the members of the GMA during
the recess. I am commending them
because, under normal circumstances, our
Standing Orders require that a matter
would have to be referred by the Speaker
to the Committee before they take action.
But even though the matter was not
referred to them, as I said, because we were
even on break, out of human compassion
and being responsible people, they
decided to intervene.


[160]

So I commend them and this is one of
the grey areas that We have been talking
about that we should look at our Standing
Orders and find out whether if there is
urgent need, a committee can intervene in
an issue without necessarily being
referred to the Committee by the Speaker.
I am confident that if the Committee on
Health had enough time, they would have
been able to also meet the FWSC or other
stakeholders so that they would have had
an informed position on the subject. 

Mr Speaker, so We want to put it on
record that by this Statement Parliament
is not taking sides on the issue at all. We
are neither supporting doctors nor
supporting FWSC nor Government for that
matter. We are trying to appeal to the
conscience of doctors and to urge the
other stakeholders that it is important for
us to fast track there solution of this matter.

Like Hon Members have indicated
earlier, it is important that in handling
matters of this nature-there must be
mutual confidence, mutual trust and
mutual respect. If we are not able to have
these tenets in place, we would find it
difficult to resolve the matter timeously.
So I will appeal to all stakeholders that we
should have a human face in handling this
matter and we should also have
circumspection in handling this matter. If
we are able to imbue ourselves with
circumspection and human face, I am sure
that this matter would be resolved sooner
than later. 

It is unfortunate that this matter had to
go to compulsory arbitration. It is a last
resort and I think that as a country, we
should avoid matters or prevent matters
getting to the last tunnel.

Mr Speaker, Ghana has a lot of
goodwill. Ghana has earned itself a lot of



[161]

[MR AVOKA] 
international image and a lot of
international respect. We are attracting
investors all over into the country, so
when we have strikes of this nature being
splashed in the newspapers, in airwaves,
et cetera, and investors get to know about
it and you have a strike action that affects
the human resource of the country, it
might at the end of the day, undermine
the confidence that the international
community have in us.

It is against this background that, even
though we have rights that we should
prosecute, we have obligation to the
nation and we must be .balancing the two
acts of rights and obligations and
sometimes conscience, to add.

Against that background, Mr Speaker,
I want to associate myself with the Hon
Member who made the Statement and all
the contributors in appealing to our
Brothers and Sisters in the GMA, to try
and go back to work while we continue
with negotiations and come to amicable
solution. I think it is better to jaw-jaw
than to hold the country and everybody
to ransom. It will not help anybody at the
end of the day.

Yesterday, 1 was at Korle Bu in the night
and I was made to understand that
patients who were already on admission
prior to the strike, the doctors still attend
to them and I think that is commendable.
So if it is important to attend to patients
who are already in the hospitals, it is only
fair that those who come in and are even
in worse conditions, may also have to be
attended to. 

So while we are urging the doctors to
call off the strike and go back to work, in
the same vein, fortunately, the Hon
Minister for Health is in the Chamber, we
will also urge him to implore or to use his
good offices and ensure that all other


[162]

stakeholders that are committed to this
exercise are up to the task and commend
them for that work.

Mr Speaker, I cannot conclude without
commending hospitals, like the 37 Military
Hospital, Police Hospital and other
Government hospitals or clinics and
indeed private clinics that have stepped
in to save lives in the country. We
commend them and we are optimistic that
in the not too distant future, our doctors
will go back to work and the country will
be the winner and nobody will be the loser.

1.00p.m.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Thank
you very much, Hon Leader. We have a
short Statement on the flood and we shall
have two contributors on this. 

Hon Dr Ahmed Yakubu Alhassan, Hon
Member for Mion.

1.OOp.m. 

Floods in Accra
Dr Ahmed Yakubu Alhassan (NDC -
Mion): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.
I rise to make a Statement on the floods in
Accra today, Wednesday, 25th October,
2011.

Mr Speaker, the whole nation,
particularly the Accra Metropolis woke up
to floods engulfing very large sections of
the entire city. These floods were
obviously caused by the heavy
downpour throughout the night in
addition to the earlier rains during the
week.

Mr Speaker, the resultant disaster
caused by the floods has seriously
affected businesses including farms and
homes. That means the structures and
their contents, service infrastructure and
most importantly, the loss of irreplaceable
precious human lives. Indeed, Mr Speaker,



[163]

[DR ALHASSAN] 

as I listened to radio this morning, the
situation was so alarming, The Mayor of
Accra himself and other high ranking
government officials, including Ministers
and Deputy Ministers advised citizens
from all flooded areas to remain at home
until the water recedes to manageable
levels. Parents were also advised not to
lift their wards to school.

Mr Speaker, His Excellency the
President, John Evans Atta Mills, has
waded in the floods in himself by
embarking on site tour to witness the
devastation personally. All these events
occurring in a short time underlined the
seriousness of the crisis.

Mr Speaker, the National Disaster
Management Organisation (NADMO)
and the Security Services are doing their
best to contain the situation through
routine emergency operations and t e
provision of relief services to affected
families under circumstances of stretched
material and human resources.

The nation supports and commends
their gallant efforts gar agreeing to respond
to the desperate need of their motherland.
This is because we ac told that the
operations started as early as twelve
midnight. Genuine sympathies to the
families who lost loved ones. Government
should also take steps to bring more relief
to affected families. After these temporary
measures have run their courses, more
long-term solutions should be found
using more current engineering tools that
synchronise with planning discipline.

As individuals, we must also show
more interest in weather forecast updates
on radio and television so that we can take
more proactive individual security
measures ahead of public emergency
service interventions.

I will also call on Government to equip
our emergency services with the needed
infrastructure and logistics to deal with
disasters. This is because climate change
and its associated weather extremes are
no more a concept but a real threat the
human mind has to contend with.


[164]

Once again, we thank the emergency
services for a good j ob done and continue
to be done.

Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Thank
you very much.

Ms Cecilia Abena Dapaah (NPP -
Bantama): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for
giving me the opportunity to contribute
to the Statement on today’s flooding of
Accra ably made by the Member of
Parliament for Mion. I believe as a nation,
we are now confronted with how prepared
we are to undertake emergency disasters
and to find solutions to them.

I will first of all like to express my
condolences to the families who were
touched ‘by the loss of life and also
sympathise with those people who are
victims of this flooding, which was as a
result of four to five hours of rain starting
at midnight when everybody was asleep
and it continued till the wee hours of the
morning. 

We are all aware of natural disasters
but we are also aware that some of these
disasters come about as a result of failures
on our part. For instance, we have the
experience of the Bagri Dam which comes
yearly and with notification, yet, some
people are stubborn, when they are told
to move to higher areas or places that are
safer, they continue and insist on staying
in these flood-prone areas.

I hope we would take lessons from
some of these happenings. And in recent
memory, we had the floods that occurred
in Atiwa, Akwatia, Kade, Fanteakwa and
parts of Kwabibirem and we know that
some of these are attributable to the
galamsey operations being carried out by
some residents in the area.

We also had the flooding of the Kumasi
Market and we know that it was as a result
of our inability to dispose of garbage in



[165] 

[MS DAPAAH]

the metropolis. Now, and today, we have
the Accra floods and we have all heard
the harrowing tales of death, disasters
and of grief that have been expressed by
the people in this capital city of ours.

Why do we have such a monumental
flooding after four or five hours of rain
each time this happens‘? It is because our
drains and gutters are choked with filth
that are man-made; these are not natural
filths or blockages, these are filth that we
collect from our homes and some of us
dump these filth and‘ garbage into our
drains and gutters.

People have also built in waterways
and there is also inadequate drainage
because we have uncovered gutters that
people find easy to dump these garbage
in. I think we can have our solutions in
building more drains, making sure that our
primary and storm drains are not used as
garbage sites and dumps. We should also
put funds aside in our Budget for these
happenings that we call force majeure.
There are certain disasters that we cannot
predict.

One area that I will call on all of us and
as a government, to be proactive in, is the
area of providing funds to Members of
Parliament and District Assemblies to
undertake flood control in our areas as
we did some time ago by giving each
Member of Parliament, twenty-five million
old cedis to undertake flood control in the
constituencies. So that in one breath, we
had the whole of Ghana being covered by
our Members of Parliament in their
contributory aspect of making sure that
our constituencies are cleared of filth.

Mr Speaker, we should also equip our
NADMO officials with enough logistics
to be able to undertake some of these


[166]

logistical distributions. Mr Speaker, we
should also commend, in this process, our
security forces who are teaming up with
the NADMO officials to provide solace
and logistics to our grief stricken brothers
and sisters. Mr Speaker, I believe that
one area that we fail to also pay attention
to is the information given by the
Meteorological Services. They predict
how the weather is going to be but I
wonder how many of us take that into
consideration when we are even going out
of our homes.

We should sensitise the citizenry and
make sure that we even translate it into
our various languages for them to
understand what all this means. We
should also make sure that all our electrical
installations are duly protected with the
necessary scientific gadgets so that we
do not have the disasters of fire outbreaks
and electrocution when these floods
occur.

We should also make sure that in the
whole process, our water bodies are
protected because some of these debris
that get into our Water bodies get them
contaminated which also cause a lot of
diseases and we hope that these floods
will not cause any outbreak of cholera and
any water home diseases.

Mr Speaker, I believe I will wind up by
wishing that this will not happen again
and if it does, we will be combat ready to
make sure we provide the necessary
logistics to our compatriots.

Thank you Speaker.

1.10p.m.

Mr Ahmed Ibrahim (NDC - Tain):
Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the
opportunity given me to contribute to the
Statement.

Mr Speaker, I want to make just a very
short contribution and in doing this, I will
start by saying that this is not the first
time that this has happened in this country.
Therefore, it has come to a point where
we have to find the root cause of the
problem of these floods or the frequent


[167] 
[MRAHMED IBRAHJM]
floods that we have been having in this
country. Mr Speaker, I will like to draw
the attention of all the stakeholders in this
direction. 

Often, we say that people are building
in water courses, therefore, we take
corrective measures by pulling down
houses that are being built on water
courses. But Mr Speaker, the question is
this, if somebody has blocked a water
course by putting up a house in that place
and we go and pull it down without
clearing the debris and all those things
from the water course what do we expect
as a country? I think the time has come
that we have to move beyond demolition
and go into clearing those areas of water
courses after the demolition.

Without doing that, we will end up
putting ourselves into more danger than
if we had even allowed that building to be
there. Mr Speaker, beside that, you go
round certain places in Accra and you see
some unauthorised structures that have
just been destroyed- So instead of
demolishing and removing the
unauthorised structures - we are not
removing unauthorised structures, we are
demolishing and destroying them. You
take the road from Achimota to Legon and
you see kiosks and all unauthorised
structures that have just been destroyed
and they are allowed to be there; what do
We expect? 

Mr Speaker, the second point I will want
to add is this. When road contractors are
constructing roads, I think the era has
come that they may provide a place for
water to flow away whenever it is raining.
This current flood issue that we are talking
of, information reaching me indicate that
the most hit places are the Graphic Road
and the Achimota-Ofankor Road where
construction is taking place and I am told


[168]

that the contractors have blocked certain
places and therefore it was difficult for
water to flow away. I was also told that
even on the Graphic Road, officers cannot
cross the water and enter their offices in
front of Toyota Ghana and other places.

So I think we have to move beyond
demolition, we have to move beyond
destruction and therefore clear
unauthorised structures in certain places.

With this, I know we may not be caught
up by flood tomorrow only to be lamenting
on it.

Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and
I thank the maker of the Statement for
drawing our attention to it.

Mr Joseph Osei-Owusu (IND -
Bekwai): Mr Speaker, we are experiencing
a rather pathetic situation in our country
this morning but I think that it is because
in this country, we tend to throw our hands
in the air and appear to say that there is
nothing we can say about it, force majeure,
yet.

But indeed, is it not because we are
not enforcing any of the regulation that
relate to land use in the country? Is it not
because we are not enforcing any of the
regulations that relate to environment in
the country? How come we have rules and
regulations on land use, buildings and yet
people build on waterways, then We come
to complain that because of those
buildings, floods are occurring.

Who are responsible? Unless we are
willing and ready to enforce all the rules
and regulations relating to land use in the
country, we may continue to experience
floods due to indiscipline in construction
and I think that as a country, we should
start taking the laws we make seriously.
Sometimes, I wonder why we spend so
much time here in this House, debating,
talking, spending man hours on insertion
and deletion and after that, that is the end,
the laws we make are not enforced.



[169] 

[MR OSEI OWUSU]

Beyond that, there is no problem that
has no solution. What we need is to focus
on what we want to do, it may cost time,
money and effort but we can and we must
solve the problem relating to flooding and
water locked areas in Accra.

Mr Speaker, when you go to Holland,
the Dutch say God created the world but
the Dutch created Amsterdam, that is
because they reclaimed land from the sea
to build on. It is technology, it is
commitment, it is money but they did it.

So my view is that, the problems of
Accra, we all know them, it is time we
focused, found the appropriate
technology, paid the cost it requires to fix
them and fix it.

Mr Speaker, I think that we have had
Statements and debates up and down like
this for far too long. If we found the
solution now, it becomes an issue - "Oh
this Minister did that", or it is too
expensive"; "it is prolific expenditure" -
- does it solve the problem? If it does it
does, not matter how much it cost, it was
worth it. 

I wish to urge this House to make a
strong case to the Executive to find the
appropriate technology, design the
appropriate constructional designs, pay
the cost financially and solve the problem.

Mr Speaker, this is my little
contribution.

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Any
contribution from Leadership or If we may
have indication from Leadership at this
stage.


[170]

Mr Avokaz Mr Speaker, given the time
that we have, I believe that this Statement
should be our final item for the day. So if
you can take one from each side, then we
conclude the day with this Statement.
[Interruption]

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Order!

Leader , if you are inclined towards
moving for us to close, you may do so.

Mr Avoka: Thank you. I want --
[Interruption.]

Mr Second Deputy Speaker: Order!

Leader, you may continue. Do not be
too attracted to these interruptions.

Mr Cletus A. Avokaz: Mr Speaker, I
beg to move, that we now adjourn
proceedings until tomorrow at. 10.00
o’clock. We have some Committee
assignments to undertake and I pray that
we will go and complete those. Besides,
tomorrow, from the provisional Order
Paper, we would not have Question time.
So we will dedicate tomorrow to the
Renewal Energy Bill. So those who have
filed amendments, at cetera, should try to
be here punctually so that we can take
that Bill.

Thank you. 

Mr Ambrose P Dery: Mr Speaker, I
beg to second the Motion for
adjournment.

Question put and Motion agreed to.

ADJOURNMENT
The House was accordingly
adjourned at 1.20 p.m. till Thursday 27th
October, 2011 at 10.00 a.m.


