FOURTH SERIES VOL.78  No. 10 
31 MAY 2012
  

PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES
OFFICLAL REPORT
THURSDAY,31ST MAY, 2012

CONTENTS 

VOTES AND PROCEEDINGS AND THE OFFICIAL REPORT-- [Col. 599]

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS -
Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development- [Co1. 600]

PAPERS -
 i) Road Traffic Regulations, 2012 (L.1. 2180)- [Col 63 7]
ii) AUS$2,000,000,000.00 for the year 2011/2012 Receivables-backed Trade 
Finance Facility between Ghana Cocoa Board (COCOB OD) and a Consortium
of Banks and Financial Institutions - [Cols. 642, 707]
(iii) Waiver of Stamp Duty on Offshore Syndicated Receivables-backed Trade
Finance Facility- [Col. 740]

STATEMENTS -
i) World No Tabacco Day- [Col. 644]
ii) Tribute to the Late Desmond Akoria-Ako Kabah- [Col 654]

CONSIDERATION STAGE OF BILLS -
Criminal Offences (Amendment) Bill, 201 1 -- [Col. 673]

MOTIONS --
i) Receivables-backed Trade Finance Facility between COCOBOD and a
Consortium of Banks and Financial Institutions - [Col 71 1]
ii) Waiver of Stamp Duty on Offshore Syndicated Receivables-backed Trade
Finance Facility- [CoI. 741] P.T.O.

RESOLUTIONS --
i) A US$2,000,000,000.00 Receivables-backed Trade Finance Facilitybetween
COCOBOD and a Consortium of Banks and Financial Institutions - [Col. 738]
ii) Waiver of Stamp Duty on Offshore Syndicated Receivables-backed Trade
Finance Facility-- [Col. 756]

ADJOURNMENT - [Col 758]

Correction of errors of substzmce may be made only on the floor of the House with the permission of
the Speaker. However, correction of typographical or grammatical errors which Members suggest for
the Bound Volumes which will be compiled at the end of the Meeting may be clearly marked in the Daily
Report, and the copy containing the corrections must be received at the Editor's Office, Parliament
House, not later than four clear days after the publication of the Daily Report.

BOUND VOLUMES of Debates (with comprehensive Index) are issued periodically during the Ses-
sion. There is no fixed subscription rate, but prices will be quoted and standing orders entered on
application.

Printed by Department of Official Report
Parliament House, Accra


[599]

THE
PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC
OF GHANA

SECOND MEETING, 2012

Thursday, 3 lst May, 20 12

The House met at 10.35 a.m.

[MADAM SPEAKER IN THE CHAIR]

PRAYERS

Votes and Proceedings and the
Official Report

Madam Speaker: Hon Members,
Correction of the Votes and Proceedings
of Wednesday, the 30th of May, 2012.
Page 1...13--

Dr. Anthony A. Osei: I am sorry,
Madam Speaker, to take you back to page
11.

Under Attendance, item (iv), there is a
hyphen between "Akoto" and "Osei".
There should not be a hyphen.

Madam Speaker: Page 12, 13 and 14.
[Pause]

The Votes and Proceedings of
Wednesday, the 30th of May, 2012 as
corrected, be adopted as the true record
of proceedings.

I do not think we have the Official
Report for today.

Let us move to item 3 on the Order
Paper then.

Mr Gerhon K. B. Gbediame: Madam
Speaker, the Hon Minister for Local
Government and Rural Development is in
the Chamber to answer the Questions.

Madam Speaker: Yes, the first
Question numbered 922 stands in the
name of Hon Benito Owusu-Bio.

Hon Member, put your Question now.

[600]

ORAL ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

MINISTRY OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT
AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT

Commercial vehicles passing
through Kumasi from Atwima-
Nwabiagya
(Payment of Levies)

Q. 922. Mr Benito Owusu-Bio asked
the Minister for Local Government and
Rural Development why registered
commercial vehicle drivers from Atwima -
Nwabiagya District passing through
Kumasi were arrested and made to pay
levies by the Kumasi Metropolitan
Assembly (KMA) when they had already
paid their levies to their own Assemblies.

Minister for Local Government and
Rural Development (Mr Samuel Ofosu
Ampofo): Madam Speaker, I am reliably
informed by management of KMA that
levies collected by the Assembly are in
respect of only vehicles that are registered
and operating in the metropolis. Vehicles
that are not registered in the metropolis
but only pass through the Assembly’s
jurisdiction are made to show evidence of
registration from the Assemblies of their
origin. This is to ensure that all commercial
vehicles are properly registered and could
be traced in case of accidents or
emergencies.

Madam Speaker, drivers of commercial
vehicles who are able to show evidence
of registration are not supposed to pay
fees to the Assembly.

Mr Owusu-Bio: Madam Speaker, it is
also a well- known fact that commercial
vehicles from the Atwima-Nwabiagya
District have boldly inscribed on them, the
name of the district and their registration
numbers from the Atwima-Nwabiagya
District Assembly.

[601]

[MR OWUSU-BIO]

So why should it be the duty of the
KMA to inspect the licences of
commercial vehicles of Atwima-
Nwabiagya District since it is an
autonomous district?

10.45 am.

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, it is the
responsibility of every Assembly within
its own jurisdiction to ensure that vehicles
that operate Within that Assembly adhere
to the bye-laws that have been
established by those Assemblies.

Again, for security reasons, they are
supposed to ensure that - For instance,
if the metropolitan guards of the KMA
are on duty and if they are supposed to
search commercial vehicles or taxis, it
does not restrict them to only vehicles
that have the embossment of KMA. This
is because in terms of security breaches,
it could be done by even vehicles outside
the jurisdiction.

But what they do not have to do is to
collect taxes from vehicles from the other
Assemblies where they have duly paid
their taxes and it is embossed on those
vehicles.

But security wise and other
infringements on the law, they can check
and ensure that - For instance, if you have
overloaded from Atwima-Nwabiagya and
you enter into KMA, it do es not mean
because the vehicle was overloaded, your
vehicle from Atwima-Nwabiagya, the
metropolitan guard in KMA cannot check
the overloading of that vehicle in Kumasi.

Madam Speaker: Any other question?

Mr Osei Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu:
Madam Speaker, the Question to the Hon

[602]

Minister reads and with your permission,
I beg to quote:

"To ask the Minister for Local
Government and Rural Development
why registered commercial vehicle
drivers from Atwima-Nwabiagya
District passing through Kumasi
were arrested and made to pay
levies by the Kumasi Metropolitan
Assembly when they had already
paid their levies to their own
Assemblies."

The Hon Minister, in his Answer,
emphasises registration and operation
within the metropolis; that is in paragraph
one. He indicated to us that levies
collected by the Assembly, that is, the
KMA, are in respect of only vehicles that
are registered and operating in the
metropolis.

In the second paragraph, the indication
is that if commercial vehicles are able to
show evidence of registration, they are
not supposed to pay fees to the Assembly.

In the first paragraph, he is linking up
two things: registration and operation of
the vehicles. In the second one, he is
alluding to only registration. What is really
the case?

Is the emphasis on just registration or
operation, in which case, it may, perhaps,
mean that even if vehicles are registered
at Atwima-Nwabiagya but they are
operating Within the Kurnasi Metropolis,
they may still be required to pay levies.
What is really the situation?

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, the
situation is that, there are instances where
vehicles are registered in one district but
they operate in another district. When
you go and operate in that district, you
will not be allowed to do double
registration. But if you are supposed to

[603]

[MR AMPOFO]

pay some operational levies, for instance,
you use the terminal of a district and when
your vehicle is leaving, you pay a certain
levy as aresult of using that terminal. That
is different from registering the vehicle in
that district. This is because the
registration is done, the taxis are registered
- For instance, in the Accra
Metropolitan Assembly (AMA) here,
registration is done and the AMA
embossment is on it.


You cannot have AMA, Tema
Municipal Assembly (TMA), Ledzokuku
Krowor Municipal Assembly (LEKMA)
embossment on one vehicle. It is done
once. But if you decide that you are
relocating and you are going to operate
in, let us say, LEKMA, which is Nungua/
Ledzokuku/Krowor, once you use their
facility there, you have to pay something
for the usage of the facility, but you are
not going to register there again as a
commercial vehicle.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Madam
Speaker, that is the issue that I was
alluding to and drawing the attention of
the Hon Minister to.

If maybe, after registering in AMA, you
have the embossment but perhaps, you
even go to another region and you are
operating there, you are supposed to pay
levies, which are not captured in the
Answer that he has provided.

In the second paragraph, he said -

"Madam Speaker, drivers of
commercial vehicles who are able to
show evidence of registration are
not supposed to pay fees to the
Assembly."

Madam Speaker, would the Hon
Minister admit that that leg of the Answer
is inadequate?

[604]

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, I think
the Answer is correct because we have
registration fee and other levies. The fact
that you have registered does not mean
that when you operate in another district
and there are certain levies to be paid, you
will not pay. So I think the Answer covers
everything

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Madam
Speaker, the Hon Minister is asked a
Question about payment of fees and levies
and he tells us that drivers of commercial
vehicles who are able to show evidence
of registration, that is, registration outside
the jurisdiction, and he is saying that they
are not supposed to pay fees to the
Assembly. [Interruptions.] The Question
says "levies -"

Madam Speaker: Hon Minority
Leader, I think the "fee" is what he has
answered and shown that they are two:
Fees for registration and levies for using
certain facilities. Is it not?

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Madam
Speaker, this is the issue. So coming from
him, I would want him to be very compre-
hensive and explicit on that. This is
because the Question is about levies but
he emphasised on the payment of fees.
And he is saying that if they show
evidence of registration, they are not
supposed to pay fees. That is my worry,
and it may be misconstrued. That is why
I wanted him to be tidier on that response
because as it is - I do not think so.

Madam Speaker: Hon Minister, can
you really explain, so that everybody
knows ---

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, I think
in line with what he said, all what we are
saying is that once you are registered and
you are in transit, you will not pay any
registration. But if you are in another
district and you are using their facilities,

[605]

[MR AMPOFO]

then you have to pay levies for the usage
of that facility. That is the difference.
[Interruptions] No, you do not pay for
route because you are in transit.
[Interruptions.]

The difficulty is that there are some
taxis which do not even use terminals and
they call them "floating vehicles" and
sometimes it is very diflicult to arrest them.
But once the authorities arrest you - You
are not supposed to operate a floating
system. You are supposed to be registered,
so that in case of emergency, when
somebody leaves something in your
vehicle, they would be able to trace you.
That is why they do not allow "floating"
taxis and others.

So once you are floating, you are
flouting the law, so you will be arrested
by any Assembly. Anytime you are
floating, they will arrest you and impose
the necessary fines on you.

Mr Isaac K. Asiamah: Madam Speaker,
this is an Atwima issue, so just allow me
to also contribute. I am even farther from
my Colleague. We face much more
difficulty than Hon Benito Owusu-Bio
because we are from the interior. My other
Hon Colleague too is there.

Madam Speaker, the last paragraph
says that those commercial drivers which
are able to show evidence of registration
-- They prove it. They show evidence of
registration all the time but they are still
arrested by the city guards all the time.
What is the Hon Minister going to do
about it?

They demonstrate that they have
registered but still they are dealt with by
the city guards. Is it because we are from
the interior?

[606]

Madam Speaker, they disturb you;
they waste the whole day; sometimes
produce would be in the vehicles and
they will be wasting their time and they
will be calling their Members of Parliament
(MPs). It is a horrible experience for some
of us. So I would want the Hon Minister
to assure us that, the guards will not
henceforth intimidate or harass Atwima
interior taxi and commercial drivers
because we are very much concerned.

Madam Speaker: Hon Minister, he
wants an assurance.

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, he has
my assurance that I am going to direct
even the Regional Co-ordinating Council
(RCC) to liaise between the two districts
and try to resolve some of these disputes
as and when they arise.

10.55 am

Dr Kojo Appiah-Kubi: Madam
Speaker, I also come from the other
Atwima.

This issue is of great importance to
constituencies or districts that border
metropolitan centres, especially the
KMA. It appears that they take us for a
ride; they have been cheating these
districts -- [Interruption] It is true. They
have been cheating the districts because
they have the RCC sited in Kumasi.

We are not talking about the utilisation
fees of terminals; that is not what we
discussed here.

Madam Speaker: Ask your question
then.

Dr Appiah-Kubi: But rather
registration fee, which these commercial
drivers are forced to pay in addition to

[607]

[MR APPIAH-KUBI]

what they have already paid to their
respective Assemblies. We would want
the Hon Minister to be clear on this and
issue a clear guidance to the KMA, that
--

Madam Speaker: I thought the Hon
Minister said he was going to take up the
matter. So this is only a repeat of what we
have said.

Dr Appiah-Kubi: It is not only on this
issue --

Madam Speaker: Hon Minister, I think
the idea is that, listen to the concerns and
work them into the advice you are
going to give.

Mr Ignatius B. Awuah: Madam
Speaker, in the Hon Minister’s Answer, he
talks about registration and operation. I
would want to know from him, since
when did the Assemblies take over the
duty of the Vehicle Examination and
Licence Division (VELD) in registering
vehicles? What I do know is that the
Assemblies give out operating licence but
not registration. If he can explain that for
me.

Madam Speaker: Yes, Hon Hon
Minister, he says evidence of registration.
Is it their job?

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, under
Act 462, Assemblies are supposed to
register all businesses within their
jurisdiction and the activities of taxi
drivers and commercial vehicles are part
of it So, you register to indicate that you
want to do business in the district. After
that, if you are operating in facilities Within
any of the Assemblies, then you pay for
the services of the facility in which you
are operating and that has been the norm.

[608]

Madam Speaker: Letus take one more
question; we have a lot of Questions and
a lot of Statements to read.

Mr Isaac Osei: Madam Speaker, just a
point of information.

I think it is true that various Assemblies
give operating licences to various
commercial vehicle owners. It is also true
that in the KMA, apart from paying their
registration fee, all the operators within
the KMA have to pay the levies at lorry
parks.

So on this occasion, I agree with the
Answer provided by the Hon Minister and
I just Wanted to make that point clear-
[Interruptions] -- so that the Kumasi
people pay what anybody who comes
from outside should pay. -

Dr Appiah-Kubi: Madam Speaker,
allow me to respond to the comment made
by my Hon Colleague. That is not what
we are discussing; it is not the fees for
the utilisation of terminals or lorry parks.
No! We do agree that any utilisation of
lony parks or terminals attract fees. That
is not in dispute. What we are discussing
is the additional payment of operation
fees. That is our problem -
[Interruptions] - that our drivers--

Madam Speaker: Order!

DrAppiah-Kubi: That our drivers are
being forced to pay additional operating
fees, when they have already paid their
respective fees. That is what we are
discussing. They should not mix up the
issues.

Madam Speaker: Hon Member, we
do not preach here. You have brought
your matter to the attention of the Hon
Minister and he says he is going to look
into it. So, to get up again, even before I
call upon you, to reply to another Hon
Member, is out of order. I think the Hon
Minister--

[609]

[MADAM SPEAKER]

Hon Minister, take his concerns and
like you promised, look at them. You
cannot pay double fees. That is true.

But thank you for bringing the
problems in your constituency to the
attention of the Hon Minister.

We are moving on. We have so many
Questions, so many Statements and so
much work to do. I think we have had
enough on that first Question.
Hon Members, let us move to Question
- 923.

Modern Market Facility for
Aflao Town
(Assistance)

Q. 923 Mr Albert K. Zigah asked the
Minister for Local Government and Rural
Development what assistance the
Ministry would provide for the
construction of a modern market facility
for Aflao town.

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, the
Ministry has no specific funding source
available to assist District Assemblies in
the construction of markets. However, in
addition to the District Assemblies
Common Fund, which every District
Assembly in Ghana receives for their
priority projects, the Ministry has
mobilised additional resources to support
Assemblies in their developmental efforts
based on their performance through the
District Development Facility (DDF).

It is, therefore, the hope of the
Ministry that Ketu South will do well to
qualify for the DDF and utilise the funds
on its priority projects, of which the
market could be one.

Madam Speaker: Hon Member, your
three- supplementary questions.

[610]

Mr Zigah: Madam Speaker, Ithank
the Hon Minister for his Answer, which
is conditional upon the performance of the
District Assembly.

The district had qualified on some few
occasions but relating the resources to
the demand and population of the area,
the Assembly would still find it very
difficult to provide such a facility.

May I know from the Hon Minister
whether his Ministry will devise a
mechanism to relate District Assembly
resources to their populations for
equitable and improved developmental
facilities?

Mr Ampofo: Mr Speaker, there is
already a formula in place that regulates
the distribution of the DACF and among
others, are the population factor, the
service pressure and several other
indicators that are used in coming out with
the formula.

In coming out with the formula for Ketu
South, I believe that the population of
Ketu South had always been taken into
consideration and so, that formula will
continue to apply. Once they continue to
qualify under the Functional
Organisational Assessment Tool (FOAT)
for the DDF, I believe it will provide them
with additional incentives and money to
initiate the project.

Again, once they initiate the project, it
is ongoing and they have any need for
support, perhaps, that is where the
Ministry can come in and give them a
supporting hand. But they need to initiate
it first.

Mr Zigah: Madam Speaker, recently,
we agitated for a district. We hope the
Ministry is doing everything possible to
provide us with that district.

The market structure in question was
constructed in the early l96Os, about 50
years ago and has not undergone any

[611]

[MRZIGAH]

major extension or rehabilitation. The
market women stiffer, especially during
the rainy season.

May I know from my Hon Minister
whether his Ministry has any other
technical assistance to provide to the
market in order to improve its present
condition?

11.05 am.

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, in terms
of technical assistance, I think we have
provided the Assemblies with District
Engineers, Planning Officers and others
to support them to technically design the
infrastnlcture that they require.

But I want to say that the Ministry is
also exploring other sources of funding,
which include the recent Urban
Development Fund (UDF) and the Ghana
Urban Management Pilot Project. Once
this pilot project succeeds and we are able
to get extra funding from our donor
partners, we will not forget Ketu South.
This is because we believe that the Aflao
market is strategically located and it will
be in the interest of all of us if we look for
resources to support them.

Dr Matthew O. Prempeh: Madam
Speaker, I rise to reiterate a point my Hon
Brother from Ketu South just made.

This Question has been on the Order
Paper for far too long. If probably, he had
answered it earlier, my Hon Brother would
still be coming to the next Parliament as
the Ketu South Member of Parliament. It
is imperative that Questions are answered
timeously in this House.

Madam Speaker, I am up to ask the
Hon Minister for Local Government and
Rural Development what specific help the
Ministry, which is responsible for
markets, is going to provide for the market
my Hon Brother is asking about. Saying
that the Assembly should qualify for the

[612]

DDF, is not right. So without the DDF,
the market should not be built at Aflao?

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

Madam Speaker: What is your
question? [Laughter]

Dr Prempeh: Madam Speaker, my
question was that the National Democratic
Congress (NDC) Government gets a lot of
votes from Aflao, and the Hon Member
for Ketu South says that Aflao, which is a
major market area, needs a market - and
the President’s second home, is the Volta
Region. For the Hon Minister to come to
the podium to say there is no help for the
Aflao market, is a betrayal of the Hon
Member for Ketu South. What is the Hon
Minister going to do to support the Aflao
market?

Madam Speaker: Hon Member, he did
not say there is no hope. Were you not
here when he answered the Question that
they had provided technical support?

Dr Prempeh: Madam Speaker, I just
heard your admonition to the Hon Member
for Atwima-Kwanwoma that we do not
breach in this Chamber.

We do not live in hope, Madam
Speaker. Aflao people need the market
and the Hon Minister has assets in his
Ministry. How is he going to help Aflao
get a modern market?

Madam Speaker: Hon Minister, I think
he has put a question now. So, maybe,
you can tell how you would --

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, Ketu
South and for that matter, Aflao, has not
been neglected by the Ministry. We
ensure that when resources are
distributed, they get their fair share and
we also believe that they try to direct their
resources to their priority needs.

[613]

[MRAMPOFO]

The Hon Member would attest to the
fact that the Ministry is already
supporting the constituency and the
district to pave the Aflao Lorry Park, which
project had just begun. So, some
assistance had already come from the
Ministry to support the pavement of the
Aflao Lorry Park. Markets and lorry parks
are twins. So once we finish with the lorry
park, the market will also get its fair share.

Dr A. A. Osei: Madam Speaker, my
Hon Colleague from Ketu South asked the
Hon Minister what assistance his
Ministry would provide for the
construction of a modern market. In his
Answer, the Minister said there is no
funding. But then he goes on in the fifth
line of the first paragraph of the Answer
to say "the Ministry has mobilised
additional resources".

Madam Speaker, as far as I know, only
the Hon Minister for Finance and
Economic Planning has the legal authority
to mobilise resources. So, may Iask the
Hon Minister, in what capacity was he able
to mobilise these resources and from
where? Is it other sources that we are not
aware of? Is he trying to take the
responsibility of the Ministry of Finance
and Economic Planning? This
mobilisation of the DDF was not by the
Hon Minister. So, on what legal grounds
is he saying that he has mobilised
resources for the DDF?

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, the
Ministry is in charge of 215 Metropolitan,
Municipal and District Assemblies
(MMDAS) in the country. One of the
responsibilities of the Assemblies is to
mobilise internal resources to support
developmental projects. Again ---
[Interruption]

[614]

Dr A. A. Osei: Madam Speaker, with
respect, we are referring to the District
Development Facility (DDF).

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, again,
the Ministry, knowing very well that the
DACF is not enough to address all the
infrastructural challenges of the MMDAs,
looks beyond the DACF for other
resources that will be used to support the
Assemblies. The DDF concept, which is
based on performance assessment, was
introduced by the Ministry to elicit high
performance -- [Interruptions].

Madam Speaker: Order!

Mr Ampofo: The DDF concept was
introduced by the Ministry to elicit
performance from the Assemblies. When
you are able to perform to the expectation
of the assessment, you are given extra
resources to continue to develop your
infrastructure. Again, the Ministry -
[Interruptions]

Madam Speaker: Order! Please, let
us hear the Minister.

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, again, the
Ministry, through its policies, recently,
has come out with the Ghana Urban
Management Pilot Project (GUMPP) and
the GUMPP has also secured funding and
this funding is to support urban areas to
improve their infrastructure resources. So
these are all efforts by the Ministry to
ensure that -- [Pause]

Madam Speaker: Yes.

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, through
the provision of policies, we are able to
come out with projects and programmes
that give additional funding to the
districts.

Madam Speaker: One question at a
time. Is it not it?

[615]

Mr Kobina T. Hammond ---rose --

Madam Speaker: Hon Hammond,
were you talking to me?

Mr Hammond: Madam Speaker, yes. I
had just risen up and I thought you
directed that I should speak or something.

Madam Speaker: No! I have not
directed.

Mr Hammond: All right. I will wait for
my turn then, Madam Speaker.

Alhaji Ibrahim D. Abubakari: Madam
Speaker, considering the position of Aflao
as one of the busiest, if not the busiest
border towns in the country, and in the
light of what the Hon Member has said,
does the Hon Minister not think that
Aflao, as a matter of priority, needs a
modern market? That, they should
construct a market, if not to raise revenue,
at least, to serve as a modern gateway for
people entering the eastern corridor?
Does he not think Aflao deserves a
modern market?

Madam Speaker: Does he think?
[Pause] You do not know?

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, he is
asking whether I think? I think Aflao
deserves a modern market. The
responsibility is in the hands of the
Assembly to prioritise it as one of their
projects, undertake the project and once
it is ongoing, support could come from all
other angles to enable them realise that.

The Ministry itself will not move in
and construct a market for the Assembly.
The Assembly will have to initiate this
project. This is becausethe responsibility
of developing the district is the
prerogative of the District Assembly.
Once they decide and initiate it, then of
course, support could be sought from
other areas to push the project through.

[616]

Thank you Madam Speaker.

Mr David H. Yeboah: Madam Speaker,
Aflao, as my Hon Colleague says, is a
border town and also it has competition
with Lome. Does the Hon Minister not
think it is better for the Government to
put a modern market there to attract
visitors who are coming from Lome and
other parts?

Madam Speaker: Hon Minister, let us
hurry up. Questions have been answered
and the same questions are being pressed.
But we have a lot of Questions to answer
and a lot of Statements to make. So can
you --

11.15 am.

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, I think I
have just answered the Question. But just
to add that we also encourage public/
private partnership in developing
infrastructure for the districts. So once it
has been realised, and we all know that
Aflao is a strategic place, we encourage
the Assembly to go into public/private
partnership and get other people to
support them to develop this.

Already, the Ketu South District
Assembly is doing a lot. The market has
undergone a number of rehabilitations.
The lorry park, as I speak to you now, is
being paved, and so some activities are
going on. But we would encourage them
to also partner with the private sector in
order to expand the frontiers of the
development of the market infrastructure.

Mr Ignatius B. Awuah: Madam
Speaker, the Hon Minister, in answering
the Question, says that the Ministry has
no specific funding source available to
assist District Assemblies in the
construction of markets. I am holding in
my hand, a copy of the 2012 Budget

[617]

[MRAWUAH]

Statement. On page 316, there is an
allocation of GH¢15 million to the Ministry
for the construction of jubilee markets. I
would want him to reconcile the provision
of that money and the statement he has
just made here.

Madam Speaker: Hon Minister?
[Pause] Hon Minister, did you get the
question? He has drawn your attention
to certain --

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, he is an
Hon Member of my committee and he
knows that during the budget hearing, the
Committee on Local Government and
Rural Development - [Interruption]

An Hon Member: Madam Speaker,
point of order.

His Committee on Local Government
and Rural Development?

Mr Ampofo: The Speaker’s Committee
- [Laughter] That is why I said "the
Speaker’s Committee."

Madam Speaker, during the budget
hearing processes, this issue came up and
money was allocated to the Ministry of
Finance and Economic Planning initially
to pay for some jubilee market projects
that had already been awarded. But the
Committee insisted that once it is a market
project, the money be transferred to reflect
in the Ministry of Local Government and
Rural Deve1opment’s budget to enable us
pay on behalf of the projects that were
already in place.

So this GH¢15 million is not an amount
that we can rely upon to go and construct
a new market for Aflao.

Madam Speaker: We arelmoving on
to the next Question-- Question 924.

Office Accommodation for Districts
Created in 2008
(Provision)

Q. 924. Mr. John Agyabeng asked the
Minister for Local Government and Rural

[618]

Development when the districts created
in 2008 would be provided with adequate
office accommodation by the Ministry.

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, each
District Assembly has been receiving its
share of the District Assemblies Common
Fund and these funds are to be utilised
for infrastructural development, of which
the provision of adequate office
accommodation forms part. It is,
therefore, the prerogative of the District
Assemblies to prioritise their needs and
work on them.

Madam Speaker, it is gratifying to
note that most of the districts created in
2008, have in one way or the other,
started the construction of their office
accommodation, even though work on
them is being pursued in phases.

I would want to add that some of them
have completed their administrative
blocks, which are housing their staff now.

Mr Agyabeng: Madam Speaker, in the
2012 Budget Statement, it was stated that
42 new districts are to be created this year
and each district is going to receive a
seed capital of GH¢1 million. New districts
were created in the middle of 2008. The
Hon Minister knew that these districts
were created in the middle of 2008. He
definitely also knew that those districts
lacked office accommodation. Apart from
the Secretariat, there are other
decentralised departments that do not
have offices.

So, I would want to ask the "Hon
Minister what he is doing to make sure
that the districts that were created in 2008
are provided with adequate
accommodation. This is because by the
Answer he gave, he knew that the District
Assemblies Common Fund can never
provide adequate accommodation for the
Secretariat and the decentralised
departments.

[619]

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, the issue
of office and residential accommodation
for decentralized staff has come to the
notice of the Ministry. The Ministry has
set up a task force to undertake an audit
of infrastructural requirements and the
state of infrastructural development in
these districts that were created around
2008.

The report would be made available and
we would then make some input to the
Ministry of Finance and Economic
Planning, to see whether it would be
possible for us also to capture them as
the new 42 districts have been captured.
So, already, a team is going round and
their report would be made available and
perhaps, in the preparation of subse-
quent budget proposal, we would put this
one across to the Ministry of Finance and
Economic Planning for consideration.

Mr Agyabeng: Mr Speaker, I would
want to ask the Minister, how much of
the seed capital of GH¢1 million has been
released to the new 42 districts so far.

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker,
processes towards the inauguration of the
districts are underway and we have gone
round -- in fact, as a matter of fact, I have
just returned this dawn from the Western
Region, where we inspected existing
facilities for the new Assemblies and
collected data on what they require
immediately to enable them take off when
inaugurated. And so, we have made
specific requests to the Ministry of
Finance and Economic Planning and it is
ready to provide resources for the
Assemblies to take off.

Mr A. Gyabeng: Madam Speaker, I am
not convinced with the Minister’s answer.
I am asking about the seed capital of GH¢1
million. We are now in the middle of the
year. I am just asking how much has been
released for the infrastructural
development of the 42 districts including
the decentralized departments.

[620]

I would want him to brief the House in
detail about what he has done so far, about
the GH¢1 million for each of the 42 districts
in terms of infrastructural development,
for the secretariat and the decentralized
departments.

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, if he
wants very detailed submission on this,
then I will need notice.

Mr Isaac K. Asiamah: Madam
Speaker, I would want to fnd out from
the Hon Minister, in terms of office
accommodation for the Assemblies,
whether there is a model structure that
would ensure uniformity, so that all the
decentralized units can have access to
their offices. When you go throughout
the country, they are building different
office structures with different designs
and the rest.

Madam Speaker, I asked this question
because even market structures, for
example, when you go to the Assemblies,
as we speak, some are building markets
that look like bus stops - [Interruptions]
-Nol It is true, Madam Speaker. Let us
have model structures that would be
uniform, that would have much more cost
benefit analysis that would benefit the
districts rather than districts doing their
own thing and of course, the cost
implications are so huge.

I would want to find out from him
whether indeed, he has model structures
for some of these offices and markets that
they are putting up.

11.25 am.

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, there are
model structures that have been
developed. For instance, we have
developed a new model structure for the
new District Assemblies to be used as
their office block. And mindful of the
disability law, we have realised that in most

[621]

[MRAMIPOFO]

cases, people with disabilities find it very
difficult to access facilities at the
Assemblies. So we are incorporating all
these things into it.

Again, the Ministry of Trade and
Industry has also come out with model
market plans that have been circulated to
all the districts. Based on their strength,
the metropolis will have a different taste
and a different market style. Muni.-
cipalities will have a different one and the
districts too will have a different one.

These have been developed by the
Ministry of Trade and Industry and have
been circulated to all the District
Assemblies for them to look at, so that
when they want to develop their markets,
they will look at some of these models
and use them.

Mr Kwabena A. Asiamah: Madam
Speaker,just a small clarification.

I would want the Hon Minister to
strengthen his inspectorate directorate to
go round -- that if he goes to Atwima-
Mponua, he would see a different office
complex being built. If he goes to
Nwabiagya, just around Atwima areas,
he would see a difference.

He should go to that region for
example. Madam Speaker, there is no
uniformity at all. So, as we said, in terms
of disability access for example, he has to
inspect all these things. He should please,
strengthen his inspectorate office, so that
they can indeed, go throughout the
country and inspect all these things.

Madam Speaker: The next Question
stands in the name of Hon John
Agyabeng, Agona East.

Comprehensive Decentralization Policy
(Implementation)

Q. 925. Mr John Agyabeng asked the
Minister for Local Government and Rural

[622]

Development the status of the
implementation of the Comprehensive
Decentralisation Policy approved by
Cabinet.

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, the
Comprehensive Decentralization Policy
Framework has been formulated to
address serious concerns in the
decentralisation process. The policy is
being implemented through the Ghana
National Decentralization Action Plan.

The plan focuses on nine main priority
areas of action, namely: political decen-
tralization and legal issues, administrative
decentralization, decentralized develop-
ment planning, spatial planning, local
economic development, fiscal decentra-
lization, popular participation and
accountability, the social agenda and the
involvement of non-State actors in local
governance.

Madam Speaker, each action area
outlines the relevant policy objectives,
measures, time frame and responsible
agencies. The implementation is under the
auspices of the Inter-Ministerial Co-
ordinating Committee (IMCC), which is
chaired by His Excellency the Vice
President.

The time frame for the action plans is
from 2010 to 2014; year 1 (August, 2010 to
July, 2011); year 2 (August, 2011 to July
2012); year 3 (August, 2012 to July, 2013)
and year 4 (August, 2013 to July, 2014).

Madam Speaker, so far, the following
have been achieved under the following
action areas:

1. Political and Legal issues including
popular participation
A number of Legislative Instru-
ments has been enacted as follows:

[623]

[MR AMPOFO]

i L.I. 1961 -- the enactment of
the Local Government
(Departments of District
Assemblies) (Commencement)
Instrument.

ii L.I. 1967 1 The enactment of the.
Local Government (Urban, Zonal
- and Town Councils and Unit
Committees) (Establishment)
Instrument, 2010, L.l. 1967, which
repealed and replaced L.I. 1589 of
1994 of the same name; The L.I.
makes changes to the structure,
composition and fimctions of the
sub-district structures of the
MMDAs.

iii L.I. 1983: The Local Government
(Creation of New District
Electoral Areas and Designation
of Units) Instrument, 20 10. The
L.I. creates new Electoral Areas
in 164 out of the 170 districts
and therefore, increases the
number of electoral areas by
about 1,000.

iv. Act 801: The District Assembly
Elections (Amendment) Act,
2010 (Act 801), is the last
legislation to have been
enacted. It amends the District
Assembly Elections Act, 1994,
(Act 473). Prior to Act 801, it was
only the Electoral Commission
that could create platforms for
candidates to campaign for
election to the District
Assemblies or tmit committees.
Therefore, Act 801 allows
organisations not associated
with political parties to provide
monetary or other support for
the purpose of mounting
platforms for the common use

[624]

of candidates for election to
District Assemblies or unit
committees.

v. Local Government (Amendment)
Act 2012: In order to pave the
way for the establishment of
Municipalities that do not
conform to the requirement of
"single compact settlements" as
required by Act 462 and to cure
a similar defect in the
Municipalities created by the
Third and Fourth Governments
of the Fourth Republic, and
amendment Act was submitted
and passed by Parliament to
delete that requirement from the
criteria for the creation of
Municipalities.

vi. Stakeholder consultation with
n0n-State actors being
undertaken on a number of
initiatives including civil society
organisation orientation (CSO)
on DDF, New Decentralisation
Policy, new legislations.

vii. Training and orientation of for
new Assembly members elected
and appointed nationwide.

2. Administrative decentralisation
Madam Speaker, under this action area,
the following has been done:

i Local Government (Departments
of District Assemblies)
(Commencement) Instrument,
L.I. 1961 of 2009. This seeks to
commence the establishment of
the deconcentrated Depart-
ments of the MMDAs as
devolved departments of the
MMDAs.

[625]

[MRAMPOFO]

ii. Transfer of the staff of the
affected departments from the
Civil Service to the Local
Government Service under
schedule 1. And Madam
Speaker, under this about 3 0,000
Workers have been transferred
from the Civil Service to the
Local Government Service.

iii. Again there has been
recruitment of staff (180 in all)
for District Assemblies
undertaken last year. This year,
Government has approved and
financial clearance given by
Ministry of Finance and
Economic Planning to the Local
Government Service Secretariat
to recruit 1,402 staff to fill
vacancies in existing
Assemblies and 1,200 for the
newly created Assemblies.

iv. Strengthening of the Local
Government Secretariat is
currently underway including
the recruitment of competent
staff and resourcing of the
secretariat.

iv. Administrative Infrastructural
audit has been undertaken in
the District Assemblies and
plans are well advanced to
secure funds for the
Assemblies.

v. Training of staff of Departments
of Assemblies’ is periodically
undertaken including
orientation for new staff
recruited in 2011.

3. Local Economic Development (LED)
i. National LED framework has
been developed.

[626]

ii. Establishment of an LED
Advisory Council and
Technical Committee.

iii. NDPC has developed strategies
to mainstream LED into
MTDDPs.

iv. An LED Secretariat has been
established at the Ministry of
Local Government and Rural
Development

4. Fiscal Decentralisation

i For the first time, we have
established a fiscal
decentralisation unit in MoFEP

ii. Implementation of Composite
budgeting in 2012 Fiscal year

iii. DACF-Arrangement for timely
releases and the removal of
deductions/Detaching MPs
Fund

iv.Performance-based grant -
District Development Facility
(DDF).

v. Performance-based Urban
Development Grant (UDG) has
been established as part of the
Local Government Capacity
Support Project-about US$140
million for the Urban Grant
Madam Speaker, the fifth action
area is --

5. Spatial Planning

i. Town and Country Planning
Department to become Town
and Country Authority.

[627]

[MRAMPOFO]

ii. Provision for Regional Spatial
Planning sub-Committees and
District Spatial Planning Sub-
Committees of RPCUS and
DPCUs are being put in place
respectively.

iii. National, Regional and District
Spatial Development
frameworks are being
developed.

6. The Social Agenda

i. The establishment of the social
accountability unit at MLGRD

ii. A number of projects have
mainstreamed social
accountability into the project
components- for example, Urban
Grant, the EU Social
Accountability Grant

iii. The Urban-Back up Initiative and
the Gender Responsive skills
programme have undertaken a
number of capacity building
initiatives in the assemblies and
last but not the least.

iv.The Ghana School Feeding
Programme has mainstreamed
social accountability in its
design and implementation

7. Institutional Mechanism for Policy
Co-ordination

i. Establishment of Inter
Ministerial Coordinating
Committee-(IMCC)

ii.Establishment of IMCC
Secretariat.

iii. Ministerial re-alignment and
restructuring being undertaken

[628]

iv. Operationalisation of Decen-
tralization working group
including the development
partners and GoG
representatives have also been
put in place.

This, Madam Speaker, is the extent to
which we have practically carried the
decentralization policy and action plan

11.35 am.

Mr Agyabeng: Madam Speaker, in the
2012 Budget Statement, for the first time,
the Budget Statement had a whole policy
on fiscal decentralization, at page 268 . One
of the most important components of the
comprehensive decentralized policy by
Government, is to ensure proper fiscal
decentralization. In this year’s budget, it
was stated that the Ministry was going to
implement the composite budget I would
want the Hon Minister to brief the House
what is the state of the implementation of
the composite budget.

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, the
extent of implementation of the Composite
Budget, to give an overview of it, I would
need notice to come back to the House.

Madam Speaker: Your second
question then.

Mr Agyabeng: Madam Speaker, I am
rather surprised because the Hon Minister
was here last year --

Madam Speaker: Ask your second
question, please; ask your second
question, if you have any.

Mr Agyabeng: One of the important
functions of making sure that we have a
decentralized policy in Ghana, is making
sure that the sub-structures, the lower
structures function. So the Hon Minister
mentioned what he is doing to make sure
that the lower structures are functioning.

[629]

[MRAGYABENG]

I would want to find out from him whether
he is aware that most of the lower
structures -- town, unit, urban, zonal and
area councils are not functioning.

Madam Speaker: Hon Minister, are
you aware they are not functioning?

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, I am
aware that there are challenges with the
operations of the sub-structures of the
Assemblies. For instance, that is why we
have come out from the Ghana-Urban
Management Pilot Project to look at how
to manage the urban centres. This is
because we believe that in order to
strengthen our decentralization
processes, we need to strengthen the sub-
metros and also strengthen the Urban
Councils and the levels below them.

Under the District Development
Facility (DDF) for instance, support -
clearance has been given to the
Assemblies to use part of their DDF to
put up sub-structures, offices for the
area, town and zonal councils. And we
believe that once you have these offices
in place and then you are able to recruit
adequate staff and give them adequate
remuneration, we would have these sub-
structures working.

In fact, most of them are dealt with but
because of the inability of the District
Assemblies to remunerate them
adequately, staff of the various sub-
structures are not working up to
expectation. So we have gone round, we
have assessed and we are working towards
pushing a lot more resources to make the
sub-structures more functional. Because
once they are functional, it will then give
real meaning to our concept of
decentralization.

Mr Agyabeng: Madam Speaker, the L.I.
1961 was passed last year to make sure

[630]

that all those decentralized departments
that are supposed to work under the
District Assembly do function. I would
want to ask the Hon Minister, after the
passage of the L.I. which was brought to
the House last year, What the state of the
functioning and implementation of the L.I.
1961 is.

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, it was
part of the comprehensive Answer that I
gave, that under the L.I. 1961, de-
concentrated departments, in other words,
departments that were answerable to their
regional and national offices, are now
being decoupled and they are now
departments of the District Assemblies.
It is a process.

The process has begun by the
establishment of the Human Resource
Department at the Local Government
Secretariat, which is running through the
Regional Co-ordinating Councils and then
setting these structures up -- it just
started this year. So we are on course;
we have started putting the structures in
place and I believe that very, very soon,
you will realize that because their
budgets will now come to the Assemblies,
they will now be more answerable to the
District Assemblies rather than their
regional and national offices.

It is still too early in the day for us to
be able to give a comprehensive overview
of how successful it has been. But
gradually, we are implementing it and very,
very soon, they will not be part of the
regional offices again; they will all be
responsible to the Assemblies when all
the schedules have been passed. This is
because we also have challenges with a
number of departments, which have
already been established by law and we
cannot just integrate them into the
Assemblies until we come back to
Parliament, dissolve the laws and come
out with new laws.

[631]

[MRAMPOFO]

A consulting team from the Ministry is
Working on this and it is very difficult.
They are almost at the tail end of it. We
would come back to the House and the
House’s own laws which established
those bodies - For instance, Madam
Speaker, the Department of Town and_
Country Planning, Trade and Industry, the
Department of Education, Youth and
Sports are all backed by law and we cannot
just ask them to integrate into the
Assemblies.

So we are working on it and we will
come back with new laws -
[Interruption] - to take over and then
use that one to implement the new
process that has been put in place.

Madam Speaker: The three questions
have been posed.

Mr Frederick Opare-Ansah: Madam
Speaker, for the elucidation of the Hon
Minister, we do not dissolve laws here.
But Madam Speaker, to a very
fundamental question, which will give me
better confidence in the Hon Minister’s
answer to this. In answering several
questions to the follow-ups here, in one
instance, he mentioned that there are 215
Local Government Assemblies in the
country. And then in another answer, he
alluded to the creation of 42 new ones;
we had 170 before.

Can he be very clear, the total number
of Assemblies that we have in this
country, which will give us a lot more
confidence in the answer that he has just
provided here?

Madam Speaker: Yes, Hon Minister
- [Pause] - The Hon Minister needs
to calculate, so that we get the correct
answer - [Laughter] --

Our time is almost up. One hour is
almost up for Question time. So let us
just quickly close this matter.

[632]

11.45 am.

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, we used
to have 170 and we have created 46 extra.
But all of them are not districts. Out of
the 46, we had 6 municipalities and then
40 new districts. So if you add 46 and 170,
you will get 216.

Madam Speaker: Let us have two more
questions from Hon Osei Akoto and you,
then our time will be up.

Dr A. A. Osei: Madam Speaker, I will
allow my Hon Senior Colleague to follow
up. But just a simple question. I think I
want to commend the Hon Minister.

He was given an opportunity to boast
about his work and perhaps, in his
excitement to tell us how well he is doing,
he may have inadvertently misled the
House. I refer to page 40. He said, "for
the first time, unprecedented, we have
established a Fiscal Decentralization unit
in MoFEP".

Madam Speaker, with all respect, is the
Hon Minister aware that even during NDC
II, this unit was at the Ministry of Finance
and Economic Planning? Is he aware? So,
"for the first time", it is embellishing
something that goes with
"unprecedented". So could the Hon
Minister confirm that in NDC Il -- I can
speak on authority that during NDC ll,
this unit existed at the Ministry of Finance
and Economic Planning.

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, I did not
use "unprecedented". So I do not know
Where the "unprecedented" is coming
from.

Dr A. A. Osei: Madam Speaker, he
said "for the first time".

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, what
has been done is that between the
Ministry of Local Government and Rural
Development and Ministry of Finance and

[633] 

[MRAMPOFO]

Economic Planning, we have set up a
Fiscal Decentralization Department at the
Ministry of Local Government and Rural
Development and then there is a Fiscal
Decentralization Department at the
Ministry of Finance and Economic
Planning. And for the first time, they are
working together as a unit.

Dr A. A. Osei: Madam Speaker, that is
not the answer he gave here. He said that
"for the first time we have established ..."

Mr Ampofo: So I think I have clarified
it.

Dr A. A. Osei: Madam Speaker, yes.
Then he should seek to amend his Answer
for the purposes of clarity, so that in the
future, we cannot say that he has misled
us. So I invite him to amend his answer as
on the records.

Madam Speaker: He has amended his
answer by the reply; he has given you,
which will be on record.

Dr A. A. Osei: Madam Speaker, so the
Hansard will capture it? I hope.

Madam Speaker: That is so.

Dr A. A. Osei: Madam Speaker, I thank
you.

Madam Speaker: The last question.
Because we have already spent one hour.

Mr J. B. Aidoo: Madam Speaker, in
enumerating the Ministry’s achievement
of action plans for 2010 to 2014, the Hon
Minister has indicated on page 40, under
paragraph 4 (iii) that arrangements have
been made for the timely releases of DACF.

Madam Speaker, it is common
knowledge that the DACF allocations for

[634]

last year fourth quarter have not been
paid. First quarter for this year has not
been paid and second quarter for this year
is almost due.

How does he then juxtapose the non-
payment of the District Assemblies
Common Fund (DACF) as against his
own statement here that arrangements
have been made for the timely releases of
DACF and how effective is his
arrangement?

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, these are
policies directions and that is how we
intend to ensure that Common Fund
allocations are released timely. So if there
are challenges with it now, the overall
objective is to ensure that the District
Assemblies Common Fund allocations
are released timely. So We will still stay
focused on our policy objective and
whenever the delays are coming, make
sure that we push the necessary bottoms
for the moneys to be released.

In fact, until recently, we would realize
the releases were very, very timely.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Madam
Speaker, the Hon Minister, in the
previous Meeting, struggled to put an
exact number of the districts - the
Metropolitan, Municipal and District
Assemblies (MMDAs) we have in this
country. Today, he still appears not to be
too sure. Can we know from the Hon
Minister the exact number of MMDAs in
this country?

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, the
number is 216.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Madam
Speaker, a few moments ago, the Hon
Minister said the number was 215 -
[Interruption.] And then he said 46 were
created and the budget said they will
create 42.

Madam Speaker: Hon Member, that is
why you wanted the correct figure.

[635]

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Madam
Speaker, precisely.

Madam Speaker: And I think he said
the correct figure was 216.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Madam
Speaker, the Hon Minister knows that the
number is not 216 and that is why I want
him to put an exact number. What is it?

Madam Speaker: Hon Minister, if you
are not sure, do you need time to go and
find out and tell us?

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, I think I
have said time and again - and in order
to even make it clearer, I indicated that We
had 170 and 46 more had been added to it.
[Interruptions] That was what I said -
and I said it was 216.

Madam Speaker: Hon Members, we
have finished with Questions. I said the
last question. We have spent one hour
on Questions. We have Statements, we
have Public Business. [An Hon Member:
Madam Speaker, but the Hon Minister is
wrong]

Dr A. A. Osei: Madam Speaker, the 46
that were created, six of them were
elevated. So he is doing double counting.
Yes, he said 46. He said six of them are
municipalities which were elevated. That
is double counting.

Madam Speaker: Hon Minister, what
is the final figure that we have on record?

Mr Ampofo: Madam Speaker, the final
figure is 216.

Madam Speaker: Hon Members, let
us move on. We have spent the allocated
time for Questions.

[636]

Hon Minister, thank you very much for
coming to answer our Questions.

Mr Gbediame: Madam Speaker, I am
coming on Order 53 (2) and with your
permission, I beg to read:

"By leave of Mr Speaker, the Order
of Business set out in the Order
Paper may be altered on any
particular day."

I am trying to apply that by your leave,
the order of Business be altered, so that
some Papers will be laid to give the
Finance Committee enough time to go and
work, while we go back to Statements.

Madam Speaker: So you want us to
jump from item four and come to five?

Mr Gbediame: Madam Speaker, yes.

Madam Speaker: All right. He is
applying under Order 53 (2) to move to
item 5 instead of 4 and I think if it is that
important, we will come back to item 5
immediately after 4.

I will give permission for you to move
item 4.

Mr Opare-Ansah: Madam Speaker,
can my Hon Colleague tell the House why
it has become necessary to alter the order
of Business to lay this Paper?

Madam Speaker: I give the permission
and I give the leave. This is Public
Business and he wants to lay it and then
we move to this. The reason is so clear to
ask me to exercise my discretion.

11.55 am.

Dr A. A. Osei: Madam Speaker, you
may have some information that the rest
of us do not have. You said the reason is
so clear --

[637]

Madam Speaker: No! I do not, Hon Dr
Osei.

Dr Osei: Madam Speaker, you said
the reason is so clear, so that I thought--

Madam Speaker: Well, Public
Business -- Loans -- [Laughter]

Dr A. A. Osei: Madam Speaker, Public
Business? I see!

Madam Speaker: That is all. I do not
have any other infonnation. I think you
have more information than I have.
[Laughter]

Yes, can we lay the Paper then?

Mr Gbediame: Madam Speaker, the
Hon Minister for Transport is in the
Chamber and he will lay the first one.

Mr Opare-Ansah --rose--

Madam Speaker: Yes, Hon Member?

Mr Opare-Ansah: Madam Speaker, I
thought you mentioned the Minister for
Finance and Economic Planning?

Madam Speaker: No! I said the
"Minister for Transport". That is item 5
(a); we are not going to item 5 (b). Let us
take item 5 and then we move on to item
4. Item 4 is also important.

PAPERS

By the Minister for Transport--

Road Traffic Regulations, 2012
(L.l.2l80).

Referred to the Committee on
Subsidiary Legislation.

Madam Speaker: Can we have item 5
(b) then?

Mr Gbediame: Madam Speaker, by
your kind permission and the indulgence

[638]

of the House, I would want to apply for
permission to allow the Deputy Minister
for Finance and Economic Planning, Hon
Seth Terkpeh, to lay item 5 (b) on behalf
of the substantive Minister.

Madam Speaker: Any objections?

Mr Opare-Ansah: Madam Speaker,
the Majority Chief Whip, in making this
application, did not tell us the
whereabouts of the Minister for Finance
and Economic Planning. Besides, part of
the reason this thing found its way here,
is issues that cropped up at the Committee
yesterday.

One of the requirements of the members
of the Committee was for the Minister for
Finance and Economic Planning to answer
certain specific questions relating to this
particular item, for which his Deputy was
not so seized with the fact to be able to
deputize at the time for him.

It is very, very important therefore, if
this Paper is being laid, that the Minister
for Finance and Economic Planning is here
himself to lay this Paper.

Madam Speaker: He just wants to
know why the Minister is not here.

Mr Gbediame: Madam Speaker, as
much as I appreciate the point he is
making, the appeal is now to allow the
Deputy Minister to lay it.

Madam Speaker: That is so.

Mr Gbediame: Madam Speaker, when
it is referred to the Committee, then we
will ensure that the Minister himself --

Madam Speaker: That is not the
objection. He is saying that why is the
Minister not here. Is that not so? You
asked for the permission for the Deputy
and if they agree, the Deputy will lay it. If
not, they will state why not. But the fnal

[639]

[MADAM SPEAKER]

decision will be taken, or that was not your
-- If not, then let us lay the Paper.

Mr Opare-Ansah: Madam Speaker,
that was the first point that I made, that in
even making the application, the Majority
Chief Whip did not inform us of the
whereabouts of the Minister, which is the
normal practice. Besides that, due to the
very nature of this particular Paper that is
to be laid, it is our preference that the
Minister himself is here to lay the Paper.

Madam Speaker: What will change?
He is laying the Paper, then it will be
referred to the appropriate quarters. As
you have always done, if he is busy with
some of his duties, can we not lay this
Paper and get on more with--

Yes, shall we lay it?

Dr A. A. Osei: Madam Speaker,
perhaps, a little information may assist us.
The issue came up yesterday and the
Deputy Minister rightly so indicated to
the Committee that he had not been
informed of some communications in
Cabinet, so he was not fully apprised of
what had arisen for this Paper to be laid
today.

That was why we thought that it was
important that since he was not fully
aware of the facts - Because it is clear
that it was a Cabinet memorandum and a
letter from the Minister that brought us to
where we are - it was important that the
Minister comes to explain to the
Committee Why this lapse.

That was why the Chief Whip was
insisting that it would be useful to have
the Minister come before the Committee,
lay it, so that he can explain to the
Committee, that this is the reason.

Madam Speaker: Yes, I am told the
reason and then we weigh it and if the
House says that, let the Minister come, of
course, for good reason, he must come.

[640]

Yes, Honomable, this is the reason they
say the Minister must come. Do you have
have any--

Mr Gbediame: Madam Speaker, I have
spoken with the Deputy Minister and he
said he has been apprised and the
Minister has asked him to represent him.
He is unavoidably absent as of now. And
because of the importance of the
document, if it is laid and referred to the
Committee, we will try to ensure that after
the Minister has finished with the
meeting he is engaged in currently, he will
join them in the deliberations and
whatever --

Madam Speaker: You mean today?

Mr Gbediame: Madam Speaker, today.
Yes.
Madam Speaker: They have answered

your query. What do you--

Mr Opare-Ansah: Madam Speaker,
the point of the objection was not to in
any way, impede this particular business.
We are fully aware of the urgency attached
to the particular Agreement. Our objective
is to get the Minister to pay heed to his
duties.

Madam Speaker: He is saying that
when it is laid, it is going to the Committee
and the Minister will come -

Mr Opare-Ansah: Madam Speaker,
precisely where I am going to. So, if we
have that undertaking that the Minister is
coming to the Committee, we will drop
our objection at this time.

Thank you.

Madam Speaker: All right In that case,
shall we lay it? Item 5 (b) then.

Deputy Minister, you can now lay it.

[641]

12.05 p.m.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Madam
Speaker, before the Minister -- I
understand the difficulty that we are in.
Madam Speaker, but I think this whole
thing arises from the mix up in
communication. We recognize the Hon
Deputy Minister. He has been very
helpful in this House but our rules are
clear. Order 74 provides:

"A Paper may be-presented to the
House only by Mr Speaker, the
Chainnan of a Committee, a Member
or a Minister".

The Deputy Minister is not the Speaker,
he is not the Chairman of the Committee,
he is not a Member of this House and he
is not a Minister. But as I said, we all
recognize that he has been most co-
operative and that, we will not obstruct
that but it was for the Chief Whip to have
told us why the Minister is unable to be
here with us, in particular, when the
Deputy Minister has stated on another
platform that he was not apprised of the
reason for the delay.

So now that he has said so and fully
informed this House and the Minister has
told the Deputy Majority Chief Whip in
confidence that he is now fully apprised
of the circumstances surrounding this
and given an undertaking that the
Minister would be forthcoming, I believe
we cannot further litigate the matter but
allow the Deputy Minister to lay the
Paper. But the indication ought to have
come from the Majority Chief Whip.

Madam Speaker: Thank you very
much. Can we now lay the Paper?

[642]

By the Deputy Minister for Finance and
Economic (Mr Seth Terkpeh) (on behalf
of the Minister for Finance and
Economic Planning) --

A US$2,000,000,000 Receivables-
backed Trade Finance Facility
between Ghana Cocoa Board
(COCOBOD) and the Consortium of
Banks and Financial Institutions
listed in Appendix 1 of the
Agreement for the purchase of
cocoa beans in Ghana for the 2011/
2012 Crop Season.

Referred to the Finance Committee.

Mr Gbediame: Madam Speaker, I think
we can now go to item 4 - Statements.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Madam
Speaker, the Deputy Minister rose and
bowed to the item advertised as item 5
(b) on the Order Paper. I notice that there
is an addendum that has been circulated
and it appears there is some slight
difference in the construction before us.
So, which one did he rise to bow to? Is it
the one advertised here or the one on the
addendum?

Madam Speaker: Surely, it is the one
advertised here because the addendum
one was the Report. Is it not it? It is a
new one, which we have not reached yet.
But if you have seen some anomaly, you
might as well bring it to his attention
before we come to that. But he was dealing
with item 5 (b) on the Order Paper, not on
the Addendum.

Is that right, Hon Gbediame?

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Madam
Speaker, I now understand.

Madam Speaker: So maybe, when we
get there -- that is why I asked him, did
he want to lay any other Paper and he
said "no", we should move to item 4.

[643]

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Madam
Speaker, I appreciate it. But the wonder
is, even before the referral is made, we
have an Addendum Paper submitted to
this House, indicating that the matter
would certainly be considered as urgent
by the Committee and a Report would be
submitted today. Madam Speaker, that is
curious.

The referral will have to be made and it
is for the Committee to meet and detennine
the urgency of the matter. But even before
the referral is made, an addendum is
prepared and then we are told that before
the referral is made, the Committee will
consider the matter as urgent and report
on same day. That is really curious and
strange. This House is not a rubber
stamp and we should not be stampeded
to do the bidding of the Executive. It is
not right.

Madam Speaker: That is why I asked
you when I just saw the Addendum -
Laying of Papers - and you said I should
move to item 4. So, that is what I am
about to do. Maybe, when you come
again to the Addendum, you would
answer that. But from what you said,
having laid (a) and (b), I should move to
item 4. Is that it? So we do not deal with
the Addendum one now.

Mr Gbediame: Madam Speaker, the
Addendum is not yet laid. We are going
to item 4.

Madam Speaker: All right. Item 4.
Well, I do not have any reasons we are
not laying that but he says it is item 4, we
should move on to. Let us move on to
item 4.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Madam
Speaker, the Chief Whip is saying that the
Addendum has not been laid. I do not
know of any date that we have laid an
Order Paper. Order Papers are not laid.

[644]

They are circulated, and they have been
circulated to us. I am suggesting to you
that this is an impropriety.

Madam Speaker: Yes, maybe, when
we get there, when it is being laid, we can
explain but let us then move on to item 4,
which is Statements.

I have admitted two Statements. One
is on the Tobacco Day from Hon Elizabeth
Sackey. We have two Statements. We
have less time to deal with it. Can we
quickly deal with them and then move on
to more important business?

STATEMENTS

World No Tobacco Day

Mrs Elizabeth K. T. Sackey (NPP--
Okaikoi North): Thank you, Madam
Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to
read this Statement in commemorating the
World Tobacco Day, which falls today,
31st May, 2012

Madam Speaker, on the 16th day of
September last year, the World Health
Organization (WHO) selected "Tobacco
Industry Interference" as the theme for
this year’s World No Tobacco Day, which
falls on Thursday, 31 May, 2012.

The theme Madam Speaker, is a clarion
call for well-meaning people like those in
this House to campaign with focus on the
need to expose and counter the tobacco
industsry’s brazen and increasingly
aggressive attempts to undermine the
WHO framework convention on tobacco
control (WHO FCTC) because of the
serious danger it poses to public health.

Madam Speaker, it is curious to observe
that as more and more countries move to
fully meet their obligations under the
WHO FCTC, the tobacco industry’s
efforts to undermine the Treaty are
becoming more and more energetic,

[645]

[MRS SACKEY]

particularly with regard to countries’
attempts to ban smoking in enclosed
public places and tobacco advertising,
promotion and sponsorship. This then
explains the theme for this year’s
celebration.

The tobacco industry has a history of
shifting strategies and exploiting
legislative loopholes to achieve its goal
of continued record profits.

Unfortunately Madam Speaker, that
portion of the world’s populace, which is
blessed enough to advocate reforms, is
entirely divided against itself on the
subject of tobacco.

Immense interests, economical, social,
and as some conceive, moral, are arrayed
on either side. The legislature in some
parts of the world, have had the better
of it in point of argument, and have
pushed the attack with much vigour, yet,
with but trifling --- results and weak follow-
ups when the commemorating period or
events like to day is over.

Madam Speaker, tobacco consumption
in all forms, is a critical public health
priority. Statistics from the World Health
Organization (WHO) on the death toll
from smoking is horrendous. Tobacco use,
kills more than 5 million people per year
world wide.

12.15 p.m.

Statistical studies have long shown
that people who do not smoke live
longer than people who do, and
scientists have seen the correlation
between smoking and incidences of lung
cancer since the 1950s.

Madam Speaker, smoking is
responsible for one (1) in ten (1 0) adult

[646]

deaths. Among the five greatest risk
factors for mortality, smoking is the
single most preventable cause of death.
Eleven per cent of deaths from ischemic
heart disease, the world’s leading killer,
are attributable to tobacco use.

The Centres for Disease Control and
Prevention in America (CDCP) says
cigarette smoking is responsible for one
hundred and fifty-one thousand, three
hundred and twenty- two (151,322)
cancer deaths annually in the United
States alone.

Out of that figure, one hundred and
sixteen thousand, nine hundred and
twenty-- (116,920) are from lung cancer.
The CDCP says men who smoke are 22
times more likely to die from lung cancer
than non-smokers. Women who smoke
are 12 times more likely to die from the
disease.

Madam Speaker, more than 70 per
cent of deaths from lung, trachea and
bronchus cancers are attributable to
tobacco use. If current patterns
continue, health experts estimate that
tobacco use will kill more than 8 million
people per year by 2030. Up to half of
the world’s more than 1 billion smokers
will die prematurely of a tobacco-related
disease. This is frightening.

Madam Speaker, studies have
pointed to smoking as a risk in vision
loss among older people, mental
impairment later in life, Alzheimer’s
disease and other forms of dementia.
And therefore, attempts to improve
human lives would be meaningless until
their health issues are given the needed
priority.

Madam Speaker, the danger of
smoking has many side effects for even
non-smokers who find themselves in
smoky environment and are therefore,
called "second-hand smokers".

[647]

[MRS SACKEY]

Statistics is not readily available in
Ghana but in the United States alone,
88 million non-smokers, including 54 per
cent of children aged three to eleven,
are exposed to "second-hand" smoke
each year. These figures highlight the
devastating human cost of tobacco
inhalation, which in turn burden ou.r
troubled healthcare system. Why
should the innocent suffer because of
Someone’s insatiable appetite?

Madam Speaker, tobacco use and
poverty are inextricably linked. Many
studies have shown that in the poorest
households in some low and middle-
income countries,more than 10 per cent
of total household expenditure is on
tobacco.

This means that these families have
less money to spend on such basic items
as food, education and healthcare. In
addition to its direct health effects,
tobacco use leads to increased
healthcare costs. It contributes to higher
malnutrition and illiteracy rates, since
money that could have been. used for
food and education, is spent on tobacco.

The role of tobacco use in
exacerbating poverty and hindering
economic development needs to be fully
recognized.

Madam Speaker, in Ghana, the law on
tobacco use appears to be too relaxed.
Little is said about public smoking. It is
very common to see people smoking on
the streets without thinking about the
health implications of by-standers,
especially, children.

Again, Madam Speaker, my basic
economic theory tells me that demand
is always high when goods are cheap.
Regrettably Madam Speaker, cigarette is
too cheap in Ghana. My market survey

[648]

indicates that a piece of cigarette costs
as low as 50 Ghana pesewas, thereby
increasing patronage even among those
in teen ages.

Madam Speaker, the time has come for
this House, this country to be decisive in
curbing public smoking. There are many
cost-effective tobacco control measures
that can be used in different settings
and have a significant impact on
tobacco consumption.

The most cost-effective strategies
are population-wide public policies, like
bans on advertising, promotion and
sponsorship of tobacco products;
tobacco tax and price increases;
forbidding smoking in all public and
workplaces; and requiring large, clear
and visible graphic health messages on
tobacco packaging. All of these
measures are outlined in the WHO
Framework Convention on Tobacco
Control.

Madam Speaker, we should work
relentlessly to safeguard the health of
our citizens.

I thank you most sincerely, Madam
Speaker, for this great opportunity.

12.25 pm.

Alhaji Mohammed-Mubarak Mun-
taka (NDC ---Asawase): Madam Speaker,
I rise to associate our Committee on
Health to the Statement ably made by our
Sister, Hon Elizabeth Sackey.

Madam Speaker, today marks, "The
World No Tobacco Day" and it is very
imperative, the theme for today’s
celebration is "Industry Interference".

Madam Speaker, the history of tobacco
and its effect have been stated by my
Colleague, but permit me to add that the
Framework Convention on Tobacco
Control as we stand today, has 174
countries including Ghana, ratifying to
adhere to the Convention. To put effective

[649]

[ALHAJI MUNTAKA]

meaning to the Convention that has been
ratified by Ghana, Madam Speaker, even
on to day’s Order Paper, it is publicized for
us to continue working on the Public
Health Bill, which you will find the issue
of tobacco control in there.

Madam Speaker, the Committee on
Health has been working very hard to
ensure that this Public Health Bill is
passed into law, so that in it, where we
find tobacco control, we will very soon
be able to manage the issue of tobacco
and tobacco products, its sales, smoking
and purchases.

Madam Speaker, let me say that the
industry is really changing its tactics and
it is for this that a country like Ghana -
and I am happy that Parliament has already
taken the initiative to pass this law,
because the industry is using other
unconventional methods such as using
the inter-bilateral relationship between
them and countries to sue countries for
preventing their operations the way they
want to have it in their countries.

Madam Speaker, if you look at what we
intend to do in our law, we intend to make
sure that there is a tutorial warning on
fifty per cent of all the faces on the
product, which is very good. Madam
Speaker, what we intend to "do also in the
Bill is that, we will ban smoking in all
educational institutions.

Madam Speaker, I must add, because it
is not illegal to sell and smoke tobacco, it
is proposed that areas will be designated
for those who, despite all the warning, still
want to smoke, to do so in public places.

[650]

Madam Speaker, I remember very well
during our deliberations, one of the most
interesting things was, if a father or mother
is smoking in the house, what happens? I
remember the discussion was, that, we
must insist that they must get out of the
rooms and move to designated areas,
either Within or outside the house to
enable them smoke. I know when we get
there, there might be some controversial
issues like; "where is public place?"

The Committee insisted that it should
be in a place where there is another
person. So even if it is on the street and
there is a second person, by What we are
trying to do, it becomes a public place and
we believe that with these restrictions, it
is going to drastically inhibit the open
smoking and the abuse of children.

It is becoming, after this law, illegal for
you to even send a child less than 18 years
to purchase cigarettes for you.

Madam Speaker, with the Statement
made by my Hon Colleague today on
"World No Tobacco", I Wish to state that
we have had the support of Hon Members,
the two Deputy Speakers, yourself
Madam Speaker, and the supporting staff,
in working through this Bill, which is a
very difficult one.

But I would want to urge my Hon
Colleagues, that we should use this day
as an energizer to propel us to do more,
so that within the next few weeks, we
would be able to finish the Public Health
Bill within which the Tobacco Control Bill
is, so that as a country, by next year, when
we are celebrating "World No Tobacco
Day", we can proudly say there is a law in
place in our country that regulates and
prevents the excessive or abuse of
tobacco smoking.

Having regards to its effect, I thank you
Madam Speaker, for this opportunity.

[651]

Mrs Gifty Eugenia Kusi (NPP -
Tarkwa-Nsuaem): Thank you Madam
Speaker, for the opportunity to contribute
to the Statement made by Hon Elizabeth
Sackey.

Madam Speaker, it is very good that
we remember such days, as today being
world tobacco day in this country of ours.
I am also very happy that the Chairperson
of the Health Committee is here and is also
supporting us, together with his whole
Committee, as he said.

Madam Speaker, We are still debating
the Public Health Bill and we have a lot of
amendments to bring, even though We
are still on it.

Madam Speaker, on the clauses dealing
with tobacco, prohibiting people from
smoking in public places, we realise that
in some of the clauses, it is provided that
people are not supposed to smoke in
commercial, public places or premises and
all that but I do not see anywhere, where
we are talking about prohibiting people
smoking in their private homes where
children are and also in private air-
conditioned vehicles and cars, where
children are taken to school.

This is because you may say that
public or commercial transport is all right
but both parents may be smoking in an
air-conditioned car, tinted and children
may be in those cars, transporting them
to school. jSo I think we have to look at
that.

Also, I think that for smoking -
because those involved are so rich and
people may follow rich people, even if they
may have to give them some money -
and because a lot of people are poor, it is
going to be very difficult. But at least, we
are making a lot of attempt as Parliament
in passing this law.

Today is a great day and I urge all my
Hon Colleagues to join hands in

[652]

preventing this deadly - [ Interruptions. ]
Yes, smoking is deadly and I know that
anybody who smokes -- I had a friend
who saw the film on TV and immediately
stopped smoking. It is really deadly and
I would want to advise my Hon
Colleagues who smoke to desist from the
behaviour because it is deadly.

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

Minority Leader (Mr Osei Kyei-
Mensah-Bonsu): Madam Speaker, these
are a few comments to support the
Statement ably made by Hon Elizabeth
Sackey, the Member for Okaikoi North.

Madam Speaker, as we have been told,
it is important for us as a nation to come
to terms with the health hazards of tobacco
use, in particular, those of them who use
tobacco. I think where we are as a nation,
we need to intensify public education
against the use of tobacco.

Madam Speaker, the impact of smoking
on the health of the citizens of this country
and its concomitant effect on the purse of
this country, ought to be elevated to a
higher status than we have done thus far.

Madam Speaker, what is becoming a
commonplace event, is for smokers
particularly, in the countryside, to send
children to buy cigarettes for them. When
they are sent to buy the cigarettes, in
many instances, they tell them to light the
sticks of cigarettes that they send them
to buy before bringing them.

Madam Speaker, what is embedded in
this is that, the child is being encouraged
to taste cigarette at a very young age.
Ultimately, when such people grow up,
they become used to the taste of cigarette
and they also resort to smoking.
Madam Speaker, I believe we should
also concern ourselves with the effect of
smoking on children in particular, and also

[653]

[MRKYEI-MENSAH-BONSU]

on the reproductive health of women.
This is because as the Hon Member who
made the Statement has indicated to us,
smoking or being in a smoky environment
has a turning effect on the reproductive
health of women.

May I, at this juncture Madam Speaker,
invite us to liaise with the Ministry of
Women and Children’s Affairs to get the
people of this country agitated and
stimulated on the effect of smoking on
reproductive health of women and for the
Ministry to take this up as a project, so
that next year when we meet, they will be
in a position to report to us on the
progress they have made in these areas.

Madam Speaker, I thank you for this
opportunity.

12.35 p.m.

Prof. Mike A Oquaye (NPP- Dome-
Kwabenya): Madam Speaker, I thank you
for the opportunity to say a few words.

Madam Speaker, as much as we are
moving actually on a very laudable
ground, we need another set of
commitment by way of implementation.

Madam Speaker, we all know how
many good laws we have around but
which are not very much honoured in their
execution.

Madam Speaker, we would therefore,
pray that civil society as well as other
social and governmental departments
should have a new commitment towards
this very laudable Bill. Once it becomes
a law, we shall really take off very
effectively to achieve the desired results.

Madam Speaker, it is also very
important that public education should
take place, so that those people who have

[654]

the wrong notion that they have some
kind of right to smoke, "it is my body", "it
is my right" will quickly disabuse their
minds, so that the good intentions of this
particular law will not be honoured in the
breach.

I am particularly happy that the world
continues to appreciate certain limitations
of individual rights, so that the common
good will be promoted in some of these
arguments that we often hear about "my
right", "my right", "my right". And
particularly, the National Health Insurance
Scheme (NHIS) can be affected by those
who smoke; and it is not their private
business because when they get sick,
they tap upon the resources that belong
to the whole nation.

So this collective security approach
must also be appreciated and I believe this
will go a long way by way also of public
education and the continued involvement
of society generally.

Madam Speaker, I thank you.

Madam Speaker: I thank you.

Hon Members, let us move to the
second Statement, which will be delivered
by Hon Dominic Nitiwul, Member of
Parliament for Bimbilla.

Tribute to the Late Dr Desmond
Akoria-Ako Kabah

Mr Dominic B. A. Nitiwul (NPP -
Bimbilla): Thank you Madam Speaker, for
the opportunity to read this Statement.

Madam Speaker, when news broke
out about the death of a 27-year old
medical doctor at Korle-Bu on 27th May,
2012, many of us thought that it was a
bad dream and that when we wake up.
indeed, it will be a dream. But as more
news unfolded, it became very clear that
indeed, Dr Desmond Kabah had lost his
dear and young illustrious life tragically.

Madam Speaker, Dr Desmond
Akoria-Ako Kabah, born on the 24th
June, 1984, was the third of four children

[655]

[MR NITIWUL]

of our Colleague, Hon Leo Kabah, Member
of Parliament for Chiana-Paga in the
Upper East Region of Ghana. Dr
Desmond Kabah started his primary
school education at Bolgatanga
Preparatory School and completed same
at Happy Home Academy at Lapaz in‘
Accrahere. He proceeded to St. Andrews
JHS at Presec-Legon-

While at St. Andrews, young and
likeable Dr Desmond won a Rescue
Mission Ghana Scholarship to visit the
USA. He visited the Pentagon a day
before the infamous suicide bombing of
the twin towers and the Pentagon on
September 11, 2001.

His father, Hon Leo Kabah describes
his son as a very determined goal
achiever, who would not rest until he
had achieved the ultimate in life. He
graduated from the Ghana Medical
School on March 3, 2012 and started his
housemanship this very month, May.

Madam Speaker, Dr Desmond Kabah
was found naked and dead about 7.00
p.m. on Sunday, May 27, 2012 in his
room, number 42 on the third floor of
Block N, which accommodates House
Officers. Bloodstains were found in his
left armpit and scrotum. He was found
with bruises on the leg and blood was
trickling from the nostrils, resulting in
blood soaking his bedsheet.

Madam Speaker, we gather that Dr
Desmond bid his colleagues good night
and retired to bed at about 11.30 p.m. on
Friday, May 25, 2012, only to be
discovered dead at about 7.00p.m. on
Sunday, May 27, 2012. For two
continuous days, he failed to turn up
for work, that is, Saturday and Sunday
and did not also return calls or call anyone.

[656]

Madam Speaker, history tells us that
a single tragic event in the life of a great
nation can change and trigger a
complete revolution in the way things
are done. The tragic death of this young
doctor should change this nation in the
way we handle simple but yet important
things, especially our personal safety
and security. Sunday, May 27, 2012 will
remain a black Sunday in the history of
Korle-Bu Teaching Hospital, Ghana in
general but in particular, the family of Mr
and Mrs Leo Kabah.

Madam Speaker, a quote from one of his
friends on his Facebook wall sums up the
mood of the nation on his death. He
writes --

"Very perturbed by your demise,
Desmond Kabah! Somehow, I trust
the good Lord will bring the
perpetrators to justice. I pray the
good Lord to rest you in
Abraham's bosom!"

Madam Speaker, as a Parliament, our
hearts are with the family of our
Colleague and we pray with them to stay
strong.

However, Dr Desmond’s unfortunate
death opens up this nation to a debate
about several silent, unexplained
sorrowful murders occurring in Ghana
these days.

Madam Speaker, the people of Ghana
are worried, the weak and vulnerable are
worried and it is about time our security
forces assured all of us of our safety
anywhere and everywhere we find
ourselves in this nation.

Madam Speaker, as we mount with our
Colleague Member of Parliament for
Chiana-Paga, Hon Leo Kabah and his
family, let us use this occasion as a
nation to remind ourselves that the
circumstances that led to the
unfortunate demise of Dr Desmond
Kabah should never happen again in our
history.

[657]

[MRNITIVVUL]

May his soul rest in perfect peace and
in the bosom of the Lord.

Thank you Madam Speaker.

12.45 p.m.

Minister of State (Mr Dominic A.
Azumah)(MP): Madam Speaker, listening
carefully to the Statement, I can feel the
sense of this House that a heinous crime
had been committed and this poor young
boy has left this world.

Madam Speaker, some of us, a few, have
come across our Hon Colleague, Leo
Kabah’s son. Desmond was a very young
boy when some of us met him; a very
enterprising boy, very intelligent and very
respectful. The last time I visited Hon
Leo Kabah, I met this young man and I
cannot believe that this was the way he
was going to go. We discussed a few
things, that the North was lacking medical
doctors.

In the course of our discussions, we
prevailed on his father, Hon Leo Kabah,
that if this young man should come out of
the Medical School to be a hopeful doctor,
he should do everything possible to
accept posting to the Upper East Region,
especially Bolgatanga Hospital. Indeed,
the young man did say that he was
committed to serving the rural folk. It is
shocking that this should happen to him.

But Madam Speaker, I think the Ghana
Police Service should be called upon to
do everything possible to track down
these perpetrators. VVhoever is involved
in this crime, the police should show to
us that they are really competent. This is
a test case we are going to present to them.
They must do everything, otherwise, I
would want to say that it will be
devastating for the whole country for this
boy to be buried without us knowing who
are the cause of his death.

[658]

Madam Speaker, the Members of
Parliament (MPs) of the three northern
regions were going to meet this morning
to send a delegation to our Brother, Hon
Leo Kabah. But now that the whole House
feels the sentiments of this issue, I would
call that a very powerful delegation be
sent to console our Collewe, the father
and that we should be actively involved
in the burial of this young man who was
prepared to serve the nation.

Madam Speaker, again, reading from
the Papers, there is a call for security beef-
up in Korle-Bu where this unfortunate
incident occurred.

We do not want to stray into how it all
happened. This is because we were not
there. But to read that his body was found
naked lying in his room with bloodstains,
reveals something different and I think that
if we had very good security at Korle-Bu,
whether the incident occurred in the room
or outside, possibly, some people would
have been tracked - somebody would
have been tracked along the line.
Unfortunately, this did not happen.

So, Madam Speaker, I wish to urge the
Inspector- General of Police (IGP) that he
must put up a very strong team to go into
this matter and come out with something
to convince Ghanaians that they are up
to the task.

This young boy is gone. There are
lessons for us to learn, that wherever we
find ourselves, we must tighten the
security around us. This young boy had
nothing against anybody. We cannot
predict but he was so young a boy, very
respectful that you doubt whether he
would have had any problem with
anybody. But the incident has occurred.
I can only call on everybody to console
his senior brother and to say that may this
young boy rest in peace. May his

[659]

[MRAZUMAH]

intentions that he did have inspire others
to take up the challenge he left behind.

Madam Speaker, once again, may he
rest in peace.

Mr Isaac Osei (NPP - Subin):
Madam Speaker, I thank you for the
opportunity to support the Statement
which has been ably made by Hon
Dominic Nitiwul.

Madam Speaker, all of us to day mourn
this young man who has passed on, not
only because his father happens to be a
Member of Parliament but because
somebody, who by his training, had
dedicated himself to saving lives, has had
his life taken away from him in a manner
which has shocked the entire nation.

This young man had a lot of promise
but now, that promise has been laid to
rest. I believe that it is instructive that he
did not die in any other place but in Korle
Bu Teaching Hospital, our premier
preventive as well as curative health
institution. That is where he was brutally
taken away from us.

Madam Speaker, on an occasion like
this, we have to think not only about the
family, but also those of his colleagues
who have been trained and are on the
verge of giving service to our country. We
have to think about them. This is because
of the possible traumatic effects that they
also may suffer as a result of what has
happened to their colleague.

The Hon Azumah has talked about the
importance of the Ghana Police Service
taking this matter as a test case. We have
seen in the past few years so many people

[660]

who had been taken away from us, either
because they had been murdered, we find
people who are killed because body parts
are taken away from them and we feel that
perhaps, it is 1lS€fill for us to strengthen
the Forensic Department of the Ghana
Police Service, so that they can
investigate matters of this nature in a way
which will enable us have finality and
results.

In this particular case, while we mourn
with the Kabah family, we also urge the
appropriate authorities to take a very
serious view of this matter, so that we
can have some closure, not only for the
family but also for the hospital community
and for our people generally.

May his soul rest in peace.

Alhaj i Seidu Amadu (NDC -- Yapei/
Kusawgu): Madam Speaker, death, when
it occurs, you would wish that it did not
get close to you. If death gets close to
you, you would wish that it did not come
to you. If death comes to you, Madam
Speaker, you would wish that it comes at
the right age that every human being dies;
particularly, the good Book tells us that
every human being has been given three
scores and ten, that is 70 years.
Unfortunately, this young man has died
far away from the age that we expected
him to die. But sometimes destiny can
have its way on nature.

Madam Speaker, talking about security,
we should not limit our security cover to
only our doctors in Korle-Bu. Probably,
we should take this opportunity to look
at the possibility of extending security to
all our public hospitals.

But even in talking about doctors,
Madam Speaker, sometimes our teachers
are also exposed to a lot of risks. Very
often we have read in newspaper reports
about people taking over schools and

[661]

[ALHAJIAMADU]

using the classroom as their place for
defaecation, smoking and doing all sorts
of things. That makes it very difficult for
the children to learn in school. I think
that it is one other area we need to look at.

Madam Speaker, if you look at the
nature of work of medical officers, they
are on a 24- hour call at any time in the
night. Any time of the day, you call on a
medical officer and he is prepared to
sacrifice his rest, he is prepared to sacrifice
his security, just to come and attend to
you to save life. That is the nature of
work that doctors do and by so doing,
they are exposed to a lot of risks.

Can you imagine, Madam Speaker, if a
patient went to trick a doctor that he was
sick and needed attention, what security
precaution would that doctor take? For
him, the most important thing is how to
come and save life. If, in an attempt to
render this kind of invaluable service,
somebody takes advantage to murder him,
what do we say? So, the work of doctors
is such that at any one time, they are
exposed to risks and that is the area we
need to look at.

On the issue of the police getting
involved in this investigation, we know
that the Ghana Police Service is up to the
task that they have been given. But the
police can go nowhere if the public itself
does not come out with clues, if the public
itself does not come up with co-operation
by way of giving information that would
lead to the discovery of whoever the
suspects are. So, we should not just think
that the police themselves are magicians
who are capable of doing anything. It is
the public that needs to give that kind of
co-operation.

Whoever has any form of information,
whoever has any form of clue, let us assist

[662]

the police and I believe the police would
be in a position to unravel this mysterious
death that we need to get the culprits, so
that they can be punished to set as a
deterrent to any other group of people
who have the mind and intention of
committing such similar acts anywhere,
anytime in this country.

On this note, Madam Speaker, I wish
to associate myself with the Statement
ably made by Hon Nitiwul concerning the
death of Dr Kabah and to sympathise
with them for this great loss, not only to
the family but to the country as a whole.
This is because this is somebody who
was coming to serve mother Ghana in
respect of improving the quality of life of
our people in terms of providing quality
health service in order to save lives.

It is unfortunate he has died in this
tragic manner, particularly being a doctor.
We need to sympathise with our doctors;
we need to do everything possible for them
in order to give them the protection that
they deserve, so that they can give all
their best to the rest of our time.

12.55 p.m.

Ms Beatrice B Boateng (NPP -- New
Juaben South): Madam Speaker, thank
you for the opportlmity to add my voice
to this solemn tribute and I must
congratulate our Hon Colleague who has
put this forward.

Madam Speaker, just as I thought of
making a contribution, questions flowed,
questions that require answers and I do
not know who are going to answer these
questions.

Madam Speaker, I am speaking as a
mother, a mother who knows what it takes
to bring up a child, probably, a stubborn
child when he was a kid; what it takes for
this child to have been brought up to this
level, a medical doctor, an envy of every
parent.

[663]

[MS BOATENG]

I believe by now the mother was
waiting to rise and chest out to show to
people that she has also made it. The
question now is, what are the parents, the
colleagues, the siblings and other
associates feeling? What are their
thoughts and what are they saying? Who
answers these questions for me? By the
person who moved the tribute, he died
and was found two days later.

Has he no friends? Has he no
colleagues? Does he not have somebody
who is so close, who cares to see him
every time? Was he supposed to be on
duty, and if he could not go, who asked
about his whereabouts?

Madam Speaker, he died on the third
floor; ground floor, first floor, second and
third floors. Are there people sleeping
around, even on the third floor? Did
anybody not hear anything, a shout, a
struggle or something? What led them to
find out after the second day, Madam
Speaker?

Madam Speaker, I am asking these
questions because I think they are
nagging questions that should be
answered by somebody and I think when
they are answered, probably, the parents,
especially the mother’s heart would be at
peace a little. Madam Speaker, this thing
has happened. I am now thinking about
the colleagues; what are they going to do?
Would they want to sleep in the same flat
again? Would they keep watch all
through the night? What are we telling
them?

Then the Government -- We have
spent money to train such a genius and
we could not get what we want from him.
Is it the way government money is going
to be put to waste? For how long is this
going to continue, Madam Speaker? An
Hon Colleague’s son, then we start

[664]

thinking about a whole lot of things;
election year, what might have gone
wrong?

Madam Speaker, I think that we believe
in our police; we trust them. They have
done it before; we want them to do it
again this time. That is where hearts would
be put at rest.

On this note, I would Want to
sympathise with the parents, the siblings,
the colleagues, the authorities and all who
are involved and to say that we should
not just show our sympathy for it to look
like a nine-day wonder.

We should sit down, plan and show
proper sympathy, where the truth would
be brought out, so that all of us would be
at peace.

Madam Speaker, I would want to thank
you for this opportunity given me.

Madam Speaker: Let us have one more
from each side and then we would have
the Leaders. It is particularly an important
matter and that is why I am prepared to
spend a little more time on it. This is
because one death affects all of us.

Mr Joseph Y. Chireh (NDC - Wa
West): Madam Speaker, I also add my
voice of condolence to the family and also
say that this is a very bad news for
everybody, in terms of the age of this
young man.

All my Hon Colleagues have said a
number of things, but there are things that
we should also begin to examine. One of
them is, why it should take so long to know
that somebody is not seen? From the
report, he was supposed to be at work.

If he was not at work, why is it that
people did not find out? He has friends
who were calling on the phone, from the
reports they gave. But as for security,
you can have the most efficient police,
you can have the most efficient security
arrangement around you, but it is

[665]

[MRCHIREH]

important also, as we sit in this House, to
also have somebody, when he notices that
you are not around, to begin to ask a
question, particularly in residential areas.

So the rest of them who are there, they
must have a friend, a family member or
somebody who, when they have noticed
he is not around, should begin to ask a
question. For detection of crime also, with
the long period that he was dead, it
becomes more complex. But if it was
fresh, it could be easier.

So in terms of what we are calling on
the people to do, I would add that the
administration of Korle Bu Teaching
Hospital should take certain measures,
including strengthening the security
around the place, and not security.only in
terms of the po1ice.This is because we
know that the police may not be sufficient
in their numbers to be all over to ensure
security for everybody.

But the hospital authorities must also
arrange for security in such a way that
people can be sure, somebody else would
see them. ,Even if they cannot prevent
the crime, they can raise the alarm. The
thing has gone on for some time now and
it is not just Korle-Bu; it happened in Korle
Bu. But I am saying that it could be any
other organisation- huge organisations.
And for a young man who is to save life,
to leave so suddenly and we do not have
the facts, all we can say is that, let
everyone of us be the other’s keeper.

I know the house officers have declared
a strike to the point when they want to
see proper security arrangement. I am
very happy that my successor at the
Ministry already has been to the Korle
Bu Teaching Hospital and I believe that
together with the police, all the measures,

[666]

including what the hospital authorities
should do, would be taken, so that as early
as possible, they can be assured of their
safety and be seen that we, as a nation,
we are concerned about their lives as well,
for them to be able to take care of the rest
of us.

May his soul rest in perfect peace.

Madam Speaker: Letus have one more
from this side.

1.05 p.m.

Ms Christina Samia Nkrumah (CPP
-- Jomoro): Madam Speaker, thank you
for allowing me to add my voice to those
of my Hon Colleagues, and extend my
deepest sympathies and condolences to
our Dear Colleague, Hon Leo Kabah
Alowe, his wife and his family for the loss
of their dear son, Dr Desmond Kabah.

Now, as we all heard, we are most
concerned with how best to equip the
Ghana Police Service, security officers
and forces with the best means, so that
they can protect our citizens.

But above all, I believe that as the last
two Hon Colleagues who spoke pointed
out, what is most worrying, I think, is the
absence of the spirit of community
solidarity.

How can someone be lying in the room
for two days without anyone doing
anything about it, and without anyone
caring about it? This is alien to our culture,
our Africanness. We are taught to be our
brother’s keeper. We are taught to take
an interest in everything that is happening
around us, in our environment.

We are our brother’s keeper and we
need to instil a spirit of patriotism, of
curiosity for others, of care for our
neighbourhood. We basically need to
revisit our African culture and tradition
and take a deeper and deeper interest in
everything that happens around us. So I

[667]

[MSNKRUMAH]

believe, this is yet another wake-up call
for us to look inward for solutions to our
problems.

I would once again, want to pay my
sympathies to our Hon Colleague; we are
with him and his family in our prayers.
And for those who believe that we do not
live in our bodies, we hope that his family,
the family of Dr Desmond Kabah realize
that he is well taken care of wherever he
is.

May his soul rest in perfect peace.

Mr Gershon K. B. Gbediame (NDC--
Nkwanta South): Madam Speaker, indeed,
it is so sorrowful and one is actually out
of words to describe the type of incident
that we are faced with.

To bring up a child through secondary
school - and we all know how difficult it
is for one to gain admission into the
Medical School. Madam Speaker, as the
Hon Member who made the Statement
said, on the 3rd of March, 2012, this young
lad graduated from the Medical School.
Third of March, this year, what would have
been the ideas that would have been
running through his mind, the minds of
his parents who have successfully,
through pain, paid huge fees to see their
child complete Medical School, ready to
serve this nation? And they are faced with
this incident. We cannot explain. We
cannot understand.

But Madam Speaker, on behalf of the
Leadership, we would want to express
our sincerest condolences to the
bereaved family. Indeed, yesterday, led
by the Hon Minority Leader, there was a
team from both sides of the House who
visited the family to express our sympathy
and condolences to the bereaved family.

This is to assure them that in this critical
moment that they are going through, we

[668]

are with them. We would be praying with
them. It is our prayer that the good Lord
would comfort them and we pray that - I
hear he is the third of four children -
Those that are left behind, God will protect
them to do more than what would have
been done even in the presence of this
lost one.

Much has been said about the
incidence and it is our only prayer, like it
has been reiterated, that when we are in a
place, we should associate and from time
to time, ifwe do not see our friends, let us
try to find out what is wrong.

More so, as the Statement said, calls
that they were making were not being
answered and he was also not making
calls. That should have indicated that
something had gone wrong somewhere
and maybe, going to check at his place
earlier, especially as they said that he bid
farewell to his colleagues at 11.30 p.m. on
Friday night and the Whole of Saturday,
until 7 p.m. on Sunday --

It is our prayer that the colleagues who
are so close and associated with him,
would not allow this trauma to deter them
from rendering the services that they have
been trained to do.

Madam Speaker, this morning, I was
listening to the Board Chairman of Korle-
Bu Teaching Hospital and he was giving
assurance of making sure that the whole
place is lighted up. He said some of the
trees that had covered the lighting system
in the area are being cut and other things
are being put in place.

I think there is so much we can learn
from what has happened and it is our
prayer that it shall not be said that one of
our illustrious sons of this calibre has
died; the painful death this young chap
who is just about to start life and render
invaluable service to this country has
gone through.

[669]

[MRGBEDIAME]

May the good Lord give him a restful
place in his bosom.

1.15 p.m

Minority Leader (Mr Osei Kyei-
Mensah-Bonsu): Thank you very much,
Madam Speaker, for the opporttmity to say
a few words-

Madam Speaker, in these days of brutal
carnage and sundry bestiality deaths no
longer agitate the people of this country.
Yet the death of this young man has
touched the nerves of many in this
country.

Madam Speaker, the police have, in
their initial statement, said that they
suspect foul play and that they have
started full scale investigation. We are
told that recognizing the insecurity at the
Korle-Bu Teaching Hospital, the residence
of the housemen in particular, the hospital
authorities have begtm in earnest to erect
security facilities there. That is most
welcome but it ought not to be a knee-jerk
reaction.

Madam Speaker, we are infonned that
a person who was not used to sleeping
naked was found naked. A person with
no known ailment was found with blood
stains in his armpit, scrotum and with
some blood trickling from the nostrils. And
part ofthe skin on the leg was peeled off
and his bed sheet was soaked in blood.
That is why the police have said they
suspect foul play. The police have just
started working on the case.

Against this background, Madam
Speaker, it is utterly nauseating for a local
FM station to begin to peddle the
information to the effect that the young
man took his own life.

Madam Speaker, people should be
sensitive to the sensibilities of others.

[670]

When the police have just started action
on this, it borders on insanity for
somebody to just begin to put out this
information that the young man might
have taken his own life. Madam Speaker,
it is simply not right. It is for this reason
that it is perhaps, imperative for the
medical authorities to invite members of
the family to be present at the conduct of
the autopsy.

I am hearing that the family are not
being invited. I hope it is untrue. Just so
that the family may rest assured, may I
with utmost respect urge the hospital
authorities to invite at least, a member of
the family to be present in the conduct of
the autopsy. I think it will provide the
reassurance that they require in these
circumstances.

Madam Speaker, yesterday, when we
went to visit our Hon Colleague and his
family, I was particularly amazed at the
demeanour of our Hon Colleague (Mr Leo
Kabah) in the face of such grave
adversity. Narrating the event to us,
subsequently, he broke down and
betrayed his other side that he is after all
human and that indeed, he is shattered.
He began to sob uncontrollably and Hon
Colleagues who were with us caught the
bug and shed tears profusely.

We mourn with the family, Madam
Speaker, knowing fully well that the tears
of the parents, of the family would not be
adequate to ferry the young man to the
greater beyond and that is why we mourn
with them. The good book obliges us to
mourn with those who mourn. God knows
best what has happened and we pray to
God to grant the young man eternal rest.

We will urge our Hon Colleague and
his Wife to remain steadfast and not
capitulate in the face of these events. This
is because capitulation would mean being
vanquished by death. He should rise up
and conquer death by showing steely
determination and we will be by the side
of the family.

[671]

[MRKYEI-MENSAH-BONSU]

Madam Speaker, I thank you for this
opportunity.

Madam Speaker: Thank you very
much, Hon Minority Leader.

I thank you all, the Hon Member who
made the Statement and the contributions
that this House has shown.

Hon Members, it shows how this
House has taken in such a crime as a very
horrible crime. lntheir contributions, they
have urged different things. I am only
summarising.

Some have asked the police to do a
thorough investigation. Some have asked
us to be our neighbours’ keeper, not to
allow other people to die in their rooms
next to us without finding out and Korle-
Bu too has been asked to provide
adequate security.

It is clear that this House is not
mourning the death. This is because he is
the son of one of us; yes, that is so but
they have shown that they are mourning
the death of a young man who is a
Ghanaian and that is the way that they
will feel about every one in this country.

I will urge Ghanaians and the
authorities that have been mentioned to
look at the Statement and the concerns
expressed here and work towards
achieving the desired result to protect
citizens.

On my own behalf and on behalf of
this House, I send my condolences to the
bereaved family.

Hon Members, it is our hope, no doubt,
that the facts are quickly unraveled by the
police to enable justice take its course.

I thank you.

The next item will be item number 6 and
it will be taken by the First Deputy
Speaker.

[672]

Mr Gbediame: Madam Speaker, item
numbered 9, the Public Health Bill. The
Hon Deputy Minister and the Hon
Chairman and other Hon Members are
here. I heard some winnowing went on
yesterday.

Madam Speaker: Hon Members, the
Chair will be taken by the First Deputy
Speaker.

1.22 p.m

[MR FIRST DEPUTY SPEAKER IN
THE CHAIR]

Mr Gbediame: Mr Speaker, we have
agreed to move to item 9, Public Health
Bill at the Consideration Stage.

1.25 p. m.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, what is the fate of the Criminal
Offences (Amendment) Bill, 2011?

Mr Gbediame: Mr Speaker, I am told
that -- 

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Very well.
Hon Deputy Attorney-General and
Deputy Minister for Justice, have you
resolved all the issues?

Mr Ebo Barton-Odro: Mr Speaker, as
much as we could, yes, we have dealt with
the issues.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Very well.
Hon Members, Criminal Offences
(Amendment) Bill, 20 ll at the
Consideration Stage.

Mr Barton-Odro: Mr Speaker, the
arrangement was put in place for Hon
Yieleh Chireh to take the place of the
Chairman but because early on, an
announcement was made to the effect that
the Mental Health Bill will be dealt with,

[673]

[MRBARTON-ODRO]

he moved out of the Chamber but
somebody will bring him back. We are
sorry for this state of affairs.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, before we proceed, let us get
-- I would want clarification from the
Committee whether we are taking the
amendments that we have on the original
Order Paper as well as the Addendum to
the Order Paper. I have seen that We have
amendments dealing with the same clause
5 advertised on the Order Paper and we
have another one on the Addendum to
the Order Paper. Which is which or both?

Mr Gbediame: Mr Speaker, my
information is that, we will go through the
original Order Paper and then the
Addendum, that is the second
Consideration of the same Bill. So, we
will go through the initial or the main Order
Paper.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Very Well.
Hon Members, we are lookincg at the
amendments on the Criminal Offences
(Ammendment) Bill 2011 in the original
rder Paper ortoday. So, clause 5 -- we
continue with clause 5.

BILLS - CONSIDERATION STAGE
Criminal Offences (Amendment)
Bill, 2011

[Resumption of debate from 30-05-2012]

Clause 5 -

Mr Joseph Yieleh Chireh: Mr Speaker,
under clause 5, we have the (b) in the
original Bill--- 200 -- delete that whole
clause and substitute - and I want to
make some amendments on what has been
done here.

In the Order Paper you have it starting
with (2), (3) and (4). It should be (1), (2)
and (3) with the following amendment:

Mr Speaker, I beg to move, clause 5,
subclause 200A (1),
"200B (1) A person who engages in
racketeering commits an offence
and is liable on conviction to a term
of imprisonment for life or for a
period of not less than five years.

[674]

(2) For purposes of subsections (1)
and (2), racketeering is the act
of operating an illegal business
--"

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Let us take
it one by one, that is the formula we
adopted yesterday.

Mr Chireh: Mr Speaker, all right.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, any comments on the
amendment moved by the Hon Yieleh
Chireh? He is moving (2), 200B (2), page
2 of the original Order Paper. Let us ignore
the subclauses; they can be rearranged
at the appropriate time. This is because
we took one yesterday and that is why
they are making that one (2).

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
yesterday, the Question was put and I
think what we agreed on was what has
been captured in the Addendum, that is
the person who belongs to or participates
in an activity of an organised criminal
group, commits an offence and is liable
on conviction to a maximum penalty--

Mr First Deputy Speaker: We are not
on organised crime. The organised crime,
we gave some directives; we are dealing
with racketeering. We are dealing with
200B; We are dealing with. racketeering.
The directive we gave, I think, is what has
been captured in the Addendum.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsuz Mr Speaker,
right. We debated this matter about the
maximum sentence, whether it should be
life imprisonment or death. People are of
the opinion that because former Heads
of State have not had the courage to go
the whole hog and cause the execution of
condemned prisoners by the issuance of
the relevant warrant, we should not any
longer have it on our statute books.

[675]

[MRKYELMENSAH-BONSU]

The other side was that it does not
offend the Constitution. In any event, that
is what the conventions call for. Now,
having dealt with the organised crime, and
adopted the death penalty as the maximum
penalty, I would not be right to say that
here, it should rather be imprisonment for
life. So, we should be consistent. If we
are saying that it should be imprisonment
for life, so be it. Then we should go and
replicate same in the earlier one that we
agreed on. I think we should be
consistent. That is Why I thought that we
should still keep the death sentence.

The trial judge is not obliged to give
the maximum sentence anyway. But as
was alluded to by the Hon Member for
Akropong, we were just discussing the
suspected murder of a young doctor.
Would anybody say that if indeed, the
perpetrator is found out and that person
is subjected to the same punishment that
he meted out, it would be outrageous?

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, I think yesterday, the argument
boiled down to what constitutes
racketeering as opposed to organised
crime. And given the nature of some of
the items listed in the subsequent
amendment to constitute racketeering,
whether we can exact the maximum penalty
of death as against organised crime. So,
those are -- if you look at racketeering, it
is the act of operating an illegal business
or scheme in order to make a profit
perpetuated by a structured group. So,
the emphasis is when the group is run to
make some illegal profit, business scheme.

Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
I fully appreciate it. Yesterday, I spoke to
it as well. But if we are talking about human
trafficking, it is a grave offence. It is a

[676]

grave offence. Yes, I acknowledge that
there are some there and that is why I
thought we could maybe, structure the
offences contained in that provision.
Prostitution, as I said, I do not think that
if anybody engages in prostitution, we
could have as a sanction, the ultimate of
death penalty.

I do not believe that. But for human
traffic -- and we are saying that for such
conducts, perhaps, it might have been
persistent and we have a group or a person
who continues to deal in this, would not
the person be fit, if he is ultimately found
out to have trafficked human beings -- 2,
3, 4, 5 of them -- We should look at it
again but I agree that it may not really
affect all but some of them are grave
enough and I think human trafficking and
migrant smuggling are grave offences.

1.35 pm.

Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, I will not
have much problem with the maximum
sentence of imprisonment for life but my
worry is with the minimum of the five (5 )
years. For example Mr Speaker, in (4)
where it tries to expatiate the racketeering
to include gambling and we want to say,
for gambling, the  will be five (5)
years in my opinion. I think we need to
look at it again. This is because
prostitution and gambling for five (5)
years as the minimum, let us look at it. So
for the maximum years -- but to say the
minimum is five (5) years, means that one
cannot get less than five (5) years; it
would be between a range of five (5) years
imprisomiient but when you look at some
of the offences like prostitution and
gambling, I do not think even our --

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, this is Consideration Stage. So
if you do not agree, bring your
suggestion and then --

Alhaji Muntaka: I was of the view
that it should not be less than 12 months,

[677]

[ALHAJI MUNTAKA]

so that it will make room, depending on
which of it - For example, if you look at
What it includes, talking about bribery,
prostitution, sexual exploitation of
persons, gambling, narcotic drugs,
because some of them are very grave, yes,
the judge could go for the maximum, but
for those that are minor like prostitution
and gambling, I am of the view that it
should not be less than 12 months, that
is one year.

So it should be from one year to life
imprisonment because of some of the
items in there. For five (5) years for
prostitution, we need to be very careful.

Mr Hackman Owusu-Agyemang: Mr
Speaker, I was going to ask why is it that
racketeering is the act of operating an
illegal business or scheme in order to
make a profit perpetuated by a structured
group? Why a structured group? If an
individual - [Interruptions] -- Mr
Speaker, my attention is being drawn to
the fact that a structured group is --
but I do not see --

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, let me refresh your memory.
The Hon Member for New Juaben North,
let me refresh your memory as to some of
the things we said on the floor of the
House. Yesterday, we saw narcotic
offences there and we are saying that
under the narcotic law, it is ten years -
so why are we making it five (5) years here?

In fact, that is the reason the Hon
Minority Leader is talking about
disaggregating. If it will be possible, we
should disaggregate because we have our
laws there dealing with generally narcotic
offences and it is ten years -- so now,
why are we reducing it to five (5) years?

Meanwhile, if it is by a structured
group, the dimension is even more serious
-- if it is by a structured group - the
definition of a structured group we have

[678]

here, the dimension is wide and more
serious; why are we then giving a
minimum of five (5) years when our own
offences talk of 10 years under the current
law that we have? Yes, I just want to
refresh the Hon Member‘s memory.

Mr Owusu-Agyemang: Yes, Mr
Speaker, I was just going to that eventually
because I was telling the Hon Minority
Leader --- When the Hon Member for
Asewase said 12 months, I was going to
say 10 years, then we are consistent
because the maximum penalty here being
canvassed for, is life imprisonment, which
to some people, is equivalent to death.
So rather than reduce, just as you say,
from five (5) years to 12 months, we
should rather take it to 12 years, then we
are consistent because the one that we
are going to look at under -

Mr First Deputy Speaker: But look at
the definition of structured group; it is
not the ordinary prostitution. Look at "by
a structured group", please; you have to
look at the proper context.

Mr Owusu-Agyemang: Mr Speaker, if
you look at what we did yesterday, which
is coming for a Second Consideration --
a person who belongs to or participates
in an activity of an organised criminal
group, commits an offence liable to a
maximum penalty of death and a term of
imprisonment not less than 10 years. So I
think the consistency should be there. So
I am advocating, just as you are, that we
must maintain the ten years. But I was
not too comfortable, maybe, I have missed
it -- the structured group --

So if an individual is bad enough to
organize some of these things that are
listed there because he is an individual, it
does not attract the same penalty only by
a structured group. That is what my
difficulty with the subclause (3) is. "By a
structured group", I understand but what

[679]

[MROWUSU-AGYEMANG]

about individuals? If it is not a group, what
happens? That is why I wanted a
clarification from the Hon Deputy
Attorney-General and Deputy Minister
for Justice. If he could explain this to me,
I will be grateful.

Some Hon Members - rose -

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Yes, after
you, then the Hon Member for Manhyia.
He has been on his feet for some time.
Hon Member for Nhyiaeso, I will get back
to you later.

Mr Chireh: Mr Speaker, if you look at
the issues that are being raised, when you
are talking about racketeering, it is
different from just simple prostitution or
dealing in narcotic as an individual.
"Racketeering" by the definition is by a
structured group. First, there is an element
of conspiracy; there is also the mass
nature of the effect it can have on people.
That-is why- In fact, the argument that
is being made about ten years as being
the minimum and the life imprisonment or
death as the maximum --

Mr First Deputy Speaker: But the
amendment you moved here is five (5)
years?

Mr Chireh: Yes, Mr Speaker. You
know the Second Consideration Stage -
When I was looking at the Votes and
Proceedings, I saw that this decision was
made but we want to move to the Second
Consideration Stage to argue for the ten
(10) years. The reason is that, there is the
element of the conspiracy and there is the
element of many more people getting
affected other than the simple one person
doing an act. The third reason is that, these
other offences have specific provisions
in either the laws that have been created
or under the Criminal Offences Act.

Finally, Mr Speaker, if you look at the
Memorandum to the legislation that we

[680]

are making, it is because we have not
passed this kind of legislation that we
were blacklisted as not being serious
about fighting organised crime.

I also think that they have a format
which, generally, you must look at in the
formulation of your national law and I
think that We should separate these issues
and look at the gravity that we need to
have on this. We must have, as this
Parliament always insists, a specified range
otherwise, those who are concerned
about some other laws which have 12
months as the minimum-- Indeed, we
could leave it at life imprisonment or death
and it is a range from that to this point.
But this is racketeering and that will not
be appropriate.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, I would want to remind the
Honourable House that we are creating
criminal offences. I have seen a certain
sense of elasticity in What you are doing
and if we are not very careful, we would
pass a law that would come back to haunt
us one day, depending on who is presiding
over the case. Again, a person who is
prosecuting can decide -- Also, we
should not leave room for somebody to
decide that:

"Look, bribery is an offence under
a certain Act, so I will go and charge
under that Act instead of charging
under this."

There are a lot of factors that the House
must consider and make sure - If we
have to take time, to disaggregate and
pass a law that can stand the test of time,
I do not think it would be too costly for us
to do so. If you look at the Acts that they
are talking about, he mentioned them
there - "without more".

1.45 p.m.

Dr Matthew O. Prempeh: Mr
Speaker, I tend to agree with the Hon
Member for Wa West (Mr Yieleh Chireh)
that these words should not by themseves
be taken to mean what is being defined

[681]


[DRPREMPEH]

here. I think in our Criminal Code, there
are penalties for most of the offences that
are stated here, like you just said ---
prostitution, gambling, if it is not done
legally -- and a lot of other things.

But Mr Speaker, this is talking about
racketeering, which is totally different. If
anything at all, maybe, we should go and
define racketeering to make it precise, so
that people will understand. But I can tell
you, there are people who are doing
international cross boundary prostitution.
They go and take vulnerable ladies from
the countryside and send them to
Spain--

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member for Manhyia, let me ask you one
question. You are the Deputy Ranking
Member for the Committee on Health.
Assuming you and your committe on
Health travelled to Dubai and you met
some people there and they decided that
they had to facilitate your presence in
Dubai, and to make you very comfortable
and they gave you certain facilities--

Then you came back and there was a
certain Bill that affected the people in
Dubai and you spoke and then they heard
it and decided that this is bribery, and you
wanted the person to go in for ten or five
years or death, then they charge you for
death-- Once the maximum is life
imprisonment, the Judge could decide to
go and take the maximum and he would be
within the law. If it is the death penalty, he
will sentence you to death and he will be
within the law.

Dr Prempeh: Mr Speaker, I do not for
a moment think that once you are charged,
you are convicted. I do not for a moment
think --

[682]

Mr First Deputy Speaker: But that
possibility is there. [Interruption]
Please, you may be charged but once you
are charged, there are two things, you are
either acquitted or convicted.

Dr Prempeh: Mr Speaker, this august
House passed a law making narcotics a
non-bailable offence. We have seen on
numerous occasions our honoured
Judiciary giving bail to people charged
with narcotics. Charge per se, if you do
not adduce enough material evidence to
support a charge, no Judge will say
because they say you are doing narcotics
and it is a non-bailable offence, I will not
give you bail.

It is very, very true that these things
are subject to the application of the
prosecutors, and for that reason, I begin
to side with the Hon Speaker that, maybe,
let us disaggregate these provisions and
give specific orders to them.

But Mr Speaker, let no Hon Member
here think that racketeering or prostitution
is a lesser evil than involving yourself in
a narcotic crime. There have been
documentaries of people who have been
transported illegally to undergo
prostitution in other countries; it is racket
and racket is a structured group. So Mr
Speaker, I may agree that let us take them
one by one and disaggregate and put
minimum and maximum punishment
around them. I do not have a problem
with that.

But I would want people to disabuse
their minds that we have common
gambling - What is common gambling?
In my own constituency, some of the
problems that are endemic have to do with
narcotic offences and gambling that starts
petty and ends up in crime. So let us not
think that these things are small crimes.

[683]

[DR PREMPEH]

Maybe, we might never know what
somebody means by "small" but I do not
think there is an offence here which is
smaller than the other.

Mr First Deputy Speaker: Let me hear
from two Hon Members before the Hon
Deputy Attorney-General and Deputy
Minister for Justice comes in because he
is the one assisting us.

Dr Richard W. Anane: Mr Speaker,
one of the simplest synonyms for
"racketeering" is "felony". But I think that
there are degrees of felony. Therefore,
when it comes to punishment, one may
then be looking at the degrees to apportion
punishment.

Mr Speaker, looking at the original
amendment to section 200B(4), and
looking at the group of acts or activities
that have been assigned under
racketeering, we have bribery --
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, having regard to the state of
business, I direct that we Sit outside the
prescribed perio d.
Dr Anane: Mr Speaker, we have
bribery, we have prostitution, we have
sexual exploitation of persons, gambling,
2t C€l'€7'Q.
The worry you can easily sense from
the floor, has to do with some of the
elements of this as was put across first by
the Hon Member for Asawase (Alhaji
Muntaka) and then also by the Hon
Member for Manhyia (Dr Matthew O.
Prempeh). Sexual exploitation of
persons --
Mr First Deputy Speaker: The Hon
Member for Manhyia disagrees with the
Hon Member for Asawase. He is saying
that it is not the ordinary ones that we see
here; it is a racket.
Dr Anane: Mr Speaker, at the end of
the day, he was talking about
disaggregating and then apportioning the
minimum and maximum, and he was
worried about specifically prostitution. If
we are looking at felony and the higher
degrees, we may want to remove what we
perceive to be the smaller ones, like the
word "prostitution" which connotes so
many different meanings to so many
people and puts in "sexual exploitation
of persons" which also includes
prostitution. Then we would have
removed the"prostitution". But it is still
captured under "sexual exploitation".
There, when you look at it from the
point of view of organised crime, you can
talk about that. This is because when you
talk about "organised crime" and you talk
about "prostitution", they may have the
connotation of an individual committing
an offence as well as groups committing
an offence. But when you talk about
sexual exploitation of persons and you
bring in the question of prostitution, there,
you can talk about groups involved or
activity of groups.
So Mr Speaker, Iwould rather propose
that we remove the word "prostitution"
and permit, by definition, which will be at
the end of our Interpretation, to capture
"sexual exploitation of persons" which
must include, if we so wish, the
"prostitution". '
Mr Speaker, in the same way, when the
question of gambling comes in, I am sure
our young boys are seem to be involved
in petty gambling, but then you are talking
about a high range of gambling. There too,
we may want to be very clear what we
want but notjust place it here only to find
at the end of the day that we would be
confronted with having to manage small
children involved in matters which may
not be that big.

685 Criminal Oflences (Amendment) 31 May, 2012 Bill - Consideration Stage 686.
[DRANANE] -
Mr Speaker, I would also want to
propose that if we are able to remove the
"prostitution", find a clearer definition for
the "gambling" and then maybe, the
"bribery" because you do know that there
are various types of gambling. We may
have the petty types, the grand types and
the others. Ifwe are able to get the clearer
definition, then we could say the maximum
penalty should be life imprisonment, not
death.
If we are putting the death sentence
on our statutes, it means that we should
not bejoking with it, we should implement
it. But we do know that we do not normally
implement it. We have to start by showing
by our association with international
bodies that we frown on execution.
So, Mr Speaker, I would propose that
we remove the death sentence and rather
put in life imprisonment. Maybe, we have
to look at the minimum sentence as well.
That is my proposal, Mr Speaker.
1.55 pm.
Mr Felix Twumasi-Appiah: Mr
Speaker, I think I heard my Hon Colleague
talking ab out the fact that racketeering has
an element of conspiracy. We have the
hindsight of history, and if you look at
the way the Americans try to fight
organised crime - American Congress
passed a law called Racketeering
Influencing and Corrupt Organisation
(RICO). If you look at the law, the mobsters
that we jailed under that particular law,
there was nowhere that even the women
who were jailed were jailed under
prostitution. They were jailed either by
influencing or by aiding and abetting
corrupt organisations.
I would want to agree with Hon Dr
Richard Anane that where prostitution per
se, and indeed, it is even difficult - In
Ghana here as we are, who will you
determine to be a prostitute and how are
you even going to charge such a person?
So if we are going to go the American way
by saying that like the way they passed
the RICO -- It is all encompassing; it takes
care of -- When Al Capone and company
were jailed, there were women who were
also j ailed and everybody knows that they
were prostitutes but they could not have
charged them as prostitutes. They were
also charged under the same law - RICO.
So I think that we should adopt the word
"prostitution".
My Hon Good Friend here was telling
me that prostitution has to do with minors.
But I am saying that there are already
laws that take care of human trafficking.
If you take a minor to be given to
somebody somewhere, whether the
person is a female or a male, there are
already laws that deal with human
trafficking. So I think that the word
"prostitution" per se -- If we go by the
Hon Member’s rendition and put
something there that makes it a more
grievous offence instead of just a simple
demeanour or felony that we are going to
give l0 years or five years or 15 years, I
think it will do us a lot of good.
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
before the Hon Deputy Attorney-General
and Deputy Minister for Justice come in,
I think Hon Members should understand
the level that we are discussing. We are
not talking about an individual engaging
in prostitution; that is not it. We are
talking about "syndicating prostitution".
You look at subclause (3) "for purposes
of subsection -
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Minority Leader, we have to qualify that
type of prostitution. Hon Members --
7
F

l
1
-
687 Criminal Oyfences Mmendmeni) 31 May, 2012 Bill -- Consideration Stage 688
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr
Speaker--
Mr First Deputy Speaker: You will
come in. You have put it rightly --
"syndicated prostitution", otherwise,
excuse me, the ladies that gather there and
all those things; if you look at the
definition here - [Interruptions] N0!
They are not very far from my house at
Cantonments. If you look at this
definition, I am telling you, you will get
all the ingredients. This is because they
do not meet together, they do not -- We
will see that they will qualify under this
definitions. So the way you are --Yes, I
am telling you.
Hon Members, I am being slow on this
matter to take as many views as possible.
This is because in the first Parliament of
this Fourth Republic, when we were
passing the law of Causing Financial
Loss, the eagerness was to fight
corruption and a whole lot of other
economic crimes. Later on, that law
became one of the most controversial laws
we have ever had in our statute books up
to the Supreme Court.
If an opportunity comes again to look
at such a law, let us make sure the
ingredients of the offence are very, very
clear and all of us agree among ourselves
exactly what type of law we are passing.
Mr Kyei-Mensah-B0nsu: Mr Speaker,
we are dealing with "racketeering" and the
definition of "racketeering" provided for
by subclause (3) says:
"For purposes of subsections 1 and
2, racketeering is the act of
operating an illegal business or
scheme"-
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Up there.
We all know that prostitution is illegal.
You have established that ordinary
prostitution too, is illegal. So it is an
illegal business.
Continue. You have proved one
ingredient of the offence.
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: That is so,
Mr Speaker; I will go there.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Letus move
to the next ingredient.
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr
Speaker-
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Continue.
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsuz MrSpeaker,
fortunately, the operative words are not
"participating in"; they are "operating
an illegal business". We are not talking
about a person engaging in prostitution
or participating in prostitution; that is not
it, with respect.
Mr Speaker, then subclause (4) comes
to explain further the businesses
connected with "racketeering". But we are
talking at another level. The level of the
syndication, that is, the operators of the
scheme, not the participants. S0 if
Hon -
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, are you saying that the
participant at a certain level can also not
be the operator?
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
if the person has both credentials --
Mr First Deputy Speaker: At a certain
level, you can be a participant and an
operator.
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsuz You will be
caught for reasons of the fact that you
are an operator and not a participant.
Mr Speaker, you cited a good example
with a reference of the potential Dubai
incident. We could have a situation where

689 Criminal Ofiences (Amendment) 31 May, 2012 Bill - Consideration Stage 690
[l\/1RKYEI-MENSAH-B ONSU]
the Hon Twurnasi-Appiah traversing the
Cantonments road, getting to the Post
Office area, sees somebody and decides
-- [Laughter] He invites the person to
and then they settle. He is not an operator
of that scheme.
We are talking about operators and not
participants or people who engage in it.
So Mr Speaker, the distinction ought to
be clear and I think we -- But it was only
hypothetical, no offence is intended. Hon
Twumasi-Appiah, for instance --
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, I think the Hon Minority Leader
has made a very brilliant explanation and
we may need therefore, to define "an
operator" operating in.
' We are talking about a criminal offence.
The ingredients are very key, otherwise,
you leave this to people to put all kinds of
interpretation on it and some people who
are not intended to be caught by the law
would be caught by the law. Then we will
all be saying that the law we passed is too
elastic; it has this problem; we will go to
the Supreme Court and those of us who
passed the law will agree and disagree
among ourselves.
But the Hon Minority Leader has
added a very important dimension to this
whole issue. Who is an operator of an
illegal scheme? He has drawn a
distinction between a "participant" and
"an operator". Is it because they-
Mr Twumasi-Appiah -- rose -
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Is it
because they have used you as an
example?
Mr Twumasi-Appiah: No, Mr
Speaker. Mr Speaker, we have had this
problem here in Ghana before and I think
this issue also went to court and the case,
I do not know, but it may be dismissed.
Talking about the "operator", there was
a case in Ghana, I think, somewhere
around the Airport residential area where
a night club was allowing strip tease, the
women who stripped in there --
[Interruptions] No, it was on the news.
Mr Speaker, the fact of the matter is
that, you go to tell this person operating
the night club that because he has allowed
people to wear, excuse me to say, mini
skirts in there, things that are not even
supposed to be visible outside, so he is
an operator. The gentleman’s answer on
radio was that it has been written in black
and white there, that the place is for adults
only and if you enter there, you know
very well what you are going to see there.
So in this case, even if you talk about
the "operator", who is the "operator"? If
you have an establishment that people
decide to come there and come and sit
and because I am the operator of that
establishment, you are going to define
"operator" and arrest me and give me 10
years?
I think like I said, this idea of
prostitution should - I gave the
American example. They talk about
Racketeering, Influencing and Corrupt
Organisation. There is nowhere that the
word "prostitution" or otherwise, is
even mentioned. But, indeed, if you aid
and abet prostitution in a racketeering or
a comipt manner, definitely, that law will
catch up with you.
So all I am saying is that, since that
word, Whether it is a syndicated one,
1’
f

§
>
691 Criminal Oflences (Amendment) 31 May, 2012 Bill - Consideration Stage 692
[1\/UK TWUMASI-APPIAH]
operative or not, I think we should have a
very critical look at it.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Deputy
Attorney-General and Deputy Minister
for Justice, let me hear from you, then after
that Hon Benito. What is your full name?
[Pause] Hon Deputy Attorney-General
and Deputy Minister for Justice, you have
the floor.
Mr Barton-Odro: Mr Speaker, Ithink
that the distinction that was made by the
Hon Minority Leader settles it all. This is
because we have a distinction between
an individual getting involved in any of
these crimes that have been listed here
and that being done in a group action.
There is a clear cut distinction.
The laws that already exist to take care
of prostitution and all those things, will
still be there. But where there is evidence
that it is in a form of racketeering, and
then this law will apply.
So I think we must be very clear in our
minds. It is not as if we are crimjnalizing to
that extent all these activities. No! The
evidence available on the docket -
Mr First Deputy Speaker: But Hon
Deputy Attorney-General and Deputy
Minister for I ustice, it is not clear on the
face of the record. If it were clear, we would
not have been debating and arguing all
this while.TThe explanation you are giving
is all right. We are in the process of
shaping the legislation. At the end of the
day we would be very clear in our minds
what type of law we are making.
So until this explanation, you never
drew a distinction between a "participant"
and an "operator".
Mr Barton-Odro: Well.
Mr First Deputy Speaker; So the
picture is becoming clearer and clearer.
2.05 pm. -
Mr Bart0n-Odro: Yes, but Mr Speaker,
it says "criminal acts associated with
racketeering include". It is not exhaustive
but it is saying that as associated with
racketeering, includes these.
Looking at it from the group action
level, then they will fall in line. If they are
not within group action level, they are out
of it.
Mr Owusu-Bio: Mr Speaker, I rise to
add my word in supporting what the Hon
Minority Leader said and which you also
agreed that there was the need for us to
have a definition for this whole issue.
Mr Speaker, in the case of the operator,
usually when they are females, they are
"brothel owners" or "Madams", and in
the case of the males, they are regarded
and called "pims". So these are the actual
people that I think we are all discussing
and talking about. If it is about defining
them, then this is who they are.
Also Mr Speaker, I would like to add
that we insert the words "illegal
gambling" because just "gambling" alone
Mr First Deputy Speaker: The
illegality of the act is already in the
definition. It says the business must be
illegal.
Mr Owusu-Bio: But Mr Speaker, we
have legal gambling all over Ghana here.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Yes, if you
look at the definition of "racketeering",
and if yours is legal, then you are not
caught by the law.
Mr Owusu-Bio: Thank you, Mr
Speaker.

l
693 Criminal Oflences (Amendment) 31 May,
Mr Chireh: Mr Speaker, if you look at
it now, I think we should go by what we
all seem to be understanding.
This is a criminal activity by a racketeer
and it must be related to these. For
instance, when people were talking about
prostitution, in our own Criminal Code, it
is not an offence.
It is rather soliciting, which is the
offence, and that is why the police swoop
on the women who solicit.
What we are talking about is that, it
must be a racketeer. And as Dr Prempeh
said earlier, it must be people who are
organizing these activities and exploiting
a whole lot of people and creating
problems. So I would want to also beg
that, do not let us trivialize this whole issue
about this.
I am saying we are doing this in
conformity With a United Nations (UN)
Resolution and it requires that we do these
things uniformly We are not talking about
pims. PlII1S are people who go and look
for girls for a master or something. That
cannot be racketeering.
Secondly, he is talking about hotel
owners. If we have a hotel, it is a legitimate
business. [Interrupti0n.] Gambling? The
word is "brothels". Let us settle on this
matter, that by the definition, once we are
saying "criminal acts associated with", we
are not defining each of them as being
done by an individual, there are specific
laws for those.
Therefore, if they are about the kind
of punishment we should give, it must be
seen in the form of proving first, that the
person is operating a racketeering group
or a structured group. If you do not prove
that these offences do not hold, they will
2012 Bill -- Consideration Stage 694
not hold just because you engage in one
or the other.
It must be a structured group; a
"structured group" has been defined and
therefore, it is not going to be an individual
who engages in this as the fears of my
Hon Friend -
Mr First Deputy Speaker: But a
"structured group" is an individual added
to one person, two or more.
Mr Chireh: Yes - [Laughter]
Mr First Deputy Speaker: And they
do not need to agree?
Mr Chireh: No!
Mr First Deputy Speaker: They
should not meet and plan, and it should
not be randomly formed; that is the
definition.
Mr Chireh: I cannot disagree with Mr
Speaker and that is why I am saying
"yes". But actually, I have a different
view about what you are saying.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: You are
entitled to your opinion; you are on the
floor of the House.
Mr Chireh: Yes, lknow, Mr Speaker.
The other thing about gambling is that
we have legislated in this Parliament for
operation of casinos and the rest of them,
which are taxed and they are sources of
revenue for the State. We are not talking
about those.
There are other people operating who
have not been licensed and they are doing
all kinds of business. These are the ones
this law is targeting. So do not let us
confuse the individual provisions of the
Criminal Code, which deal with specific

695 Criminal Oflences (Amendment) 31 May, 2012 Bill - Consideration Stage 696
[MRCHIREH]
activities. Let us deal with the group one
and any act associated with the group.
I go for the life imprisonment because
life imprisonment in the Ghanaian prison
is more or less death sentence because of
the crowded nature of the place. .
We should also be looking at the
Amnesty International always arguing
against - And for us, maybe, the review
of our own Constitution in future. We
should not do that and have to change so
many laws; we should just be consistent
and make it "life imprisonment".
Of course, given the gravity of this
situation, I would think that even the five
years is small and it should be ten years.
Mind you, Mr Speaker, we are
amending an eXistingAct, so we must take
cognizance of whatever is provided there
and decide, because this is going to be
the latest law. Whatever provisions we
have may have to be overriding that one.
Sol in the light of the fact that we are
amending anAct and we are including this
and the fact that we are doing so to
conform with the United Nations
Resolution that we signed and agreed.
But we have not domesticated it in our
Parliament; we have to be very consistent
and not make it look like we are dealing
with the small, small fishes in the pot.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Let me take
the last one and I will give some
directives.
Mr I. K. Asiamah: Mr Speaker, proof
or determination of an offence is always a
controversial issue. Because if you are
talking of prostitution, for example,
sometimes our police, even if they see a
car parked around an alleged prostitution
enclave, let me put it that way, or zone, if
you are not careful, you are arrested. So
as you said, whether an‘ "operator" or a
"participant", it is always something that
we should be more cautious about.
Mr Speaker, many young people have
been arrested at spots around and young
girls have been arrested around those
spots presumably, as prostitutes. When
they see somebody dressed in a way that
that person presumes to be bad or immoral.
Around those areas, she is presumed
to be a prostitute. And for me, it is bad
and I do not thm - \>Vhether we have
designated areas that can be marked like
they have in Holland or so, the Red Light
District or so, I think we are being a little
hypocritical in whatever We do in this
country.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: You have
been to the Red Light?
Mr I. K. Asiamah: No, Mr Speaker!
We do not even have the things there;
they are all perceptional things. This is
because of the moral or the cultural thing;
we are not able to even designate areas
where you can clearly state that these are
prostitute areas and that they have their
licence to operate.
Yes, we do not have them. But
meanwhile, our police have the courage
to sometimes arrest people in specific
areas, presumably because people are
standing there, people have parked their
cars there, they are chatting or they are
engaged in conversation. I thm we have
been quite unjust to ourselves.
Let us be more precise ab out some of
these things.
Mr Speaker, I have not called for
legalization. Whatl am calling for is that

697 Criminal Ofiences (Amendment) 31 May, 2012 Bill - Consideration Stage 698
[MRI K. ASIAMAH]
we should be bold as a country to confiont
the issue. And some of these laws would
just remain in our statute books and they
may not work. This is because in my
opinion, if it is just a matter of taking
somebody for prosecution "because
somebody is alleged to be - It is all
allegation, Mr Speaker. We should be
careful. p
Another issue is about this debate Hon
Yieleh Chireh raised- the death sentence.
2.15 p.rn. .
p Mr First Deputy Speaker: No! He
mentioned life imprisonment. He said life
imprisonment.
Mr I. K Asiamah: Mr Speaker, we even
filed an amendment yesterday jointly --
Hon Owusu-Benito and I, for us to revisit
that issue. But it has not been captured
here and we have been asking why it has
not been captured here - [Interruption]
- Under "organized crime". No! I think
we would insert it before we conclude the
debate.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, a lot of issues have cropped
up on the floor of the House. One of them
is whether the minimum should be five
years, given some of the conduct that have
been listed here and we know in some of
our laws, they are about ten years’
minimum, like narcotic offences.
Another issue, which the Hon
Minority Leader raised with regard to -
"it is not necessarily a "participant" but
the "person operating the scheme". I have
also looked at article l9 (1 1) ofthe I992
Constitution, which imposes an
obligation on this House to make sure that
the offence must be defined and the
penalty for it, is prescribed in a written
law. So we have to be very careful to
define as much as possible the various
ingredients of the oifence, so that we do
not create problems for ourselves in the
future.
The issue cropped up again why we
are lumping up all these elements, all these
criminal conducts, all the various acts that
we want to make illegal. Why are we
putting them together and just leaving the
whole matter to the trial Judge? Is it
possible to disaggregate some of them,
put them in categories and provide the
necessary sanctions for them? These are
issues that have cropped up on the floor
of the House in the discussions so far.
I direct that we go back and look at
these issues well and make sure that while
it is true that we have been blacklisted, it
is true that we have to domesticate this
law; it is equally true that in so doing, we
also have a constitutional obligation on
us to make sure that we pass a law that
can withstand the test of time.
It is virtually a one-clause issue and
once we all agree, this matter can be taken
in a matter of l5 minutes on the floor of
the House. '
I so direct.
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
while we are at that, let me just indicate to
the Chairperson or the Hon Member who
has been drafted to now shepherd the
Bill, the Hon Yieleh Chireh, to look at
subclause (3). I think maybe, he would
proffer a better construction:
"For purposes of subsection (I) and
(2) racketeering is the act of
operating an illegal business or
scheme." .
In my view, we should rather situate
"perpetuated by a structured group in
order to make a profit". But the way it has
been crafted here, "an illegal business or
scheme in order to make a profit
(-
I-

699 Criminal Oflences (Amendment) 31 May, 2012 Bill - Consideration Stage 700
[MRKYEI-MENSAH-BONSU]
perpetuated by a structured group", is
like group. He should just look at that.
Mr Speaker, finally, we did not attempt
any amendment in respect of the original
section 95 (b) -- "Enforced dis-
&pp68I2111C6". Can you please, look at it
again?
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Is that not
what we agreed, that we would take it up
at the Second Consideration Stage?
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsuz Mr Speaker,
just so that they sanitize it. Because for
subclause (4), sanitizing it is different from
what I am going to raise because this
relates to clause 4 where you have stated:
"For the purposes of this section, a
person causes the enforced
disappearance of another person if
that person arrests, detains,
abducts 
But if you go to the Memorandum page
2, last paragraph, they have stated
categorically, "enforced disappearance is
not kidnapping and it is not abduction".
And yet they come here to say that
"enforced disappearance" means
"abduction". Can they look at it?
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, in so doing, let us also look at
the United Nations (UN) Convention that
has imposed an obligation on us to have
it domesticated into our municipal law. So
we may also have to look exactly at what
the UN Convention provides and make
sure that we do not create too many
problems for ourselves.
Dr Anane: Mr Speaker, I think that is
one area which also seems to have been a
problem to some of us. Because "enforced
disappearance" normally connotes the
application of State resources to do and-
therefore, it cannot be mere abduction,
which can be done by other people.
However, I know that the difficulty
comes in when you look at jurisdictions
like Columbia in South America where we
have organized military bodies which can
also do similar things. But it still be looked
at as abduction, which is not using State
apparatus.
So, maybe, we would need to redefine
the "enforced disappearance" in our
Interpretation to capture the sentiments
as expressed in - international
documentation and not just make it that
simple abduction, which can be done by
ordinary people.
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
if I may further draw the attention of the
Hon Deputy Attorney-General and
Deputy Minister for Justice to the
penultimate paragraph in page 2, in the
Memorandum. I do not know what he
means by "abduction usually involves the
consent of the victim". I do not know
What he means by that - [Interruption]
- in the Memorandum.
It says, "Abduction may be
perpetrated by a person related to the
victim including a parent". That is
understandable. But then he goes further
to say that "Abduction, unlike enforced
disappearance or kidnapping, usually
involves the consent of the victim." I am
not too sure of what is meant by that.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: I have
extended the time, yes; we are moving.
Hon Members, I have so directed but
I wanted to find out Whether we would
consider the Public Health Bill. The Hon
Deputy Minister has been here all day,
the Chairman of the Committee is here
3

701 Criminal Oflences (Amendment) 31
[MRFIRST DEPUTY SPEAKER]
the Hon Ranking Member is here, the
Deputy Ranking Member is here and the
Hon Vice Chairman is here.
Dr Prempeh: Mr Speaker, the Hon
Deputy Ranking Member is always at the
Hon Chairman’s call. But the Chairman of
the Committee and the Deputy Chairman
are both Hon Members of your
Committee, the Appointments Committee
-- [Interruption] - I am just drawing
the Mr Speaker’s attention to this fact.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Itis true;
he is right. -
Hon Yieleh Chireh, in so doing, you
would see that in clause (3) of the Bill, we
have defined "sexual exploitation". We
have created it as an offence and we have
prescribed the punishment for it. So we
need to tie in all these things.
Prof. Aaron M. Ocquaye: Mr Speaker,
actually, we need to carry out this exercise
carefully, just like the Hon Minority Leader
was saying. "Abduction" does not imply
"consent" at all. From Latin, it is abduco
- "carry away"; you cany the person
away; that is all. How you would carry
the person away is neither here nor there.
And very often, a lot of abduction can be
done without consent, actually. So we
need to advise ourselves on that.
2.25 p.m.
Mr Chireh: Mr Speaker, Ithink this
perhaps, is a slip of pen. [Laughter] We
are not dealing with abduction here; we
are dealing with enforced disappearance,
which is slightly different. So I do not
know why it should even be -- So it must
be a slip of pen. [Laughten] The actual
provision -
May, 2012 Bill -- Consideration Stage 702
Mr Barton-0dro: Mr Speaker, if you
could read down further, it says and
with your permission,I beg to read:
"Kidnapping usually involves the
consent of the victim. The victim of
abduction is usually a child in the
possession of or under the control
of another person. A person may
be abducted for the purpose of
sexual exploitation or taken ..."
So we need to look at it in that line.
Apart from that, when you talk about
kidnapping, you are talking about the
areas of ransom. [Inz‘erruptz'0n.] Yes, it
goes with ransom. So we would want to
make that distinction very clear.
Mr Stephen K. Balado Mann: Mr
Speaker, I am alarmed; I am alarmed by
what the Deputy Attorney-General and
Deputy Minister for Justice just read, that
kidnapping is with the consent of the
victim. and -
Mr First Deputy Speaker: He says
"abduction", not kidnapping.
Mr Manu: Even abduction, that
cannot be with the consent of the victim.
Elopement can be with the consent of the
victim but not abduction. Whoever is
thinking of abduction as having the
consent of the victim, I do not know where
that person is coming from. Once there is
consent, it ceases to be abduction, and it
ceases to be a criminal offence. Once you
have consent --
Mr First Deputy Speaker: But the
point he is making is that if you are a child
and you are not in a position to give
consent.
Mr B. Manu: If it were a child, a child
cannot give consent under the law.
Mr Chireh: Mr Speaker, lbeg to say
that let us maintain it as the slip of pen.

703 Criminal Ofifences (Amendment) 31 May, 2012 Bill -- Consideration Stage 704
[MRCHIREI-1] 1
[Interrupti'on.] The information we need
is concrete. We have already provided
for abduction in our Criminal Code. What
is the definition there? It will tell whether
the provision in the Memorandum here is
the correct position, in which case, we are
all going to be saying, let us go back and
change it. But I am saying, "abduction"
cannot be defined the way it has been
defined. It is a slip of pen. It is a slip of
pen.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, I think that in view of the point
that was raised by the Hon Member for
Manhyia -- [Im‘erruptz'0n.]
Pardon? We should do one hour? We
have the Second Deputy Speaker here;
so the Second Deputy Speaker may take
the Chair. We have an Appointments
Committee meeting.
Hon Second Deputy Speaker, do you
have any engagement?
Prof. Oquaye: Mr Speaker, I can tell
from the mood of Hon Colleagues I do
not want to get there and have difficulties.
Let us do this and do it well tomorrow. I
can see the mood is not inclined towards
- [Interruption]
Mr Hackman Owusu-Agyemang: Mr
Speaker, besides, if six people leave here,
there will be nobody left. Six people will
leave here and about eight people will
leave here, there will be nobody left.
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
yesterday, we attempted some winnowing.
I was not part of the group when they
dealt with clause 20 to 33. We continued
thereafter from clause 34 to Ithink, clause
50 and I thought maybe, the path has
been smoothened. But I came and sat here
and looked at even what they have done
and realised that there were some
difficulties. I called the Chairman, drew
his attention to some of them and he
realised that indeed, we are going to
face some challenges.
So I would plead with him, that we
should step this one down and then
tomorrow, we can deal with it after the
Appointments Committee engagement.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members , quite apart from the point being
raised by the Hon Minority Leader, the
Hon Member for Techiman North spoke
to rne today and he said that as a House,
we need to take a second look at this Bill,
whether the introduction of the animal
component should be necessary.
He made the point that from his
perspective, our definition of "young
animal" is problematic, because you gave
it six months. But some of the animals
that are anticipating under the Bill Will
have a lifespan of six months. They do
not have a lifespan of six months and so,
we should still continue.
The Bill is now our property; it is left
for us to add, subtract and reshape and
he told me that we have to take a look at
it because some of the definitions that we
are proffering will create problems for us
sometime along the line.
Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, even
though, like you rightly said,judging from
the mood of the House, we need to
continue from tomorrow. But I would. want
to say Mr Speaker, that the Hon
Colleague for Techiman North did not
participate in this Bill and he does not
know in which respect we are talking to.
It is with respect to vaccination. And in
vaccination, you are only talking about
certain animals. It is not the tsetse fly or
maybe, the butterfly that we are talking
of.
We are talking about dogs, cats that
are vaccinated and the veterinary people
will tell you that it is between zero and six
months. They call them "young animals".

705 Criminal Oflences (Amendment) 31
[ALHAII MUNTAKA]
These are the things that we are dealing
with; it is not every animal that we are
talking about.
Mr Speaker, you were also of the view
that about the animal component of it, we
had the law in this country --
[Interruptions] -- Yes, "young animal’
is with respect to a part.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, why? One at a time.
Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, there is
an Act that we are trying to repeal with
this, that has to do with the veterinary
work called "Diseases of Animal Act,
I961". I would encourage my Hon
Colleague to go and read it. We had a law
that we are trying to repeal and we are
just trying to put all of them together. So
you do not just take one and --
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, we have a serious challenge
now as a House. There is a matter
pending before the Finance Committee
that ought to be taken today, today being
the last day. My attention has just been
drawn to it by the Table Off1ee-and the
Hon Ranking Member is here.
[Interrupti0n.] Pardon? No! We can
delay the vetting; we can delay it for
today. It is only two Deputy Ministers.
So Hon Akoto Osei, what is the
situation now?
DrA.A. Osei: Mr Speaker, Iwas talking
to the Minority Leader and my advice is
that because the report is just being
looked at by the Vice Chair and the other
senior members, it would be useful if
you can take a one hour suspension, look
at the Appointmemts Committee or
something and come back and --
[ Interruption. ] "
May, 2012 Bill --- Consideration Stage 706
Mr Speaker, the COCOB OD facility that
we need to look at, is a matter of national
interest. The ‘draw-down cannot occur
until the waiver is given. But there was a
problem and the Minister for Finance and
Economic Planning himself has come to
meet with the Committee, so we are
working to do that.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, I think that once the national
interest is involved, we suspend Sitting.
There are two things we have to do. Let
us suspend Sitting for one hour and come
back. It is now 2.31 p.1n. by Madam
Speaker’s clock. We will come back here
at3.21p.m. [Interruption] No! We will
manage the Appointments Committee.
[Pause]
Hon Members, we suspend Sitting for
an hour and come back at exactly 3 .3 0 p.IIL
Hon Members, I thank you very much.
Hon Members of the Appointments
Committee, let us move to Madam
Speaker’s Conference Room.
Dr M. O. Prempeh: Mr Speaker,
please, encourage the Leadership to bring
in their numbers, because we are going
to take a decision and article 104 applies.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Thm you
very much, Hon Member for Manhyia.
Sitting suspended -- 2.36 p.m.
Sitting resumed -- 7.05 p.m.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Majority Chief Whip -
Mr Gbediame: Mr Speaker, the House
was suspended and we have reconvened.
The Report of the Finance Committee is
ready. So on the Addendum ntunber 2,
we have Presentation of Papers. So we
shall take that one.
v
v
1
I
I
l

707 31 May,
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, I refer you to Addendum
number 2 - Presentation of Papers by
the Chairman of the Finance Committee.
Mr Alfred W. G. Abayateye --rose
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, are you now the new Chairman?
Mr Abayateye: Mr Speaker, I amthe
Vice Chairman of the Committee andl am
acting as the Chairman of the Committee.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Abayateye, we do not have any acting
Chairman on theAddendum Order Paper,
2; we have Chairman of the Connnittee.
Mr Gbediame: Mr Speaker, the
Chairman of the Finance Committee is not
in the country and I will crave your
indulgence and that of the House to allow
the Vice Chairman to present the Paper on
his behalf.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon Vice
Chairman -
PAPERS
By the Vice Chairman of the Committee
{Mr Afired WG. Abayateye) (on behah’ of
the Chairman of the Committee) -
Report of the Finance Committee on
the US$2,000,000,000 Receivables-
backed Trade Finance Facility
between Ghana Cocoa Board
(COCOB OD) and the consortium of
banks and financial institutions
listed in Appendix l of the
Agreement for the purchase of
cocoa beans in Ghana for the 2011/
2012 crop season.
2012 708
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members who were on the Appointments
Committee, while we were there, I ordered
that copies of the Report be distributed
to the members of the Appointments
Committee. So those of us who were at
the Appointments Committee, each of us
got a copy of the Committee’s two
Reports.
Mr Opare-Ansah: Mr Speaker, those
of us who were not at the Appointments
Committee did not have’copies and we
still do not have copies.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Very well.
Make sure that every Hon Member in the
House gets a copy of the Committee’s
Report.
While we are waiting for the
distribution of the Report to those who
do not have it, we take item number 2,
which is a procedural Motion.
MOTIONS
Suspension of Standing Order 80 (1)
Vice Chairman of the Committee (Mr
A. W. G Abayateye) (on behah’ of the
Chairman): Mr Speaker, I beg to move,
that notwithstanding the provisions of
Standing Order 80 (1), which require that
no Motion shall be debated until at least,
forty-eight hours have elapsed between
the date on which notice of the Motion is
given and the date on which the Motion
is moved, the Motion for the adoption of
the Report of the Finance Committee on
the US$2,000,000,000 Receivable-backed
Trade Finance Facility between Ghana
Cocoa Board (COCOBOD) and the
consortium of banks and financial
institutions listed in Appendix l of the
Agreement for the purchase of cocoa
beans in Ghana for the 20ll/2012 crop
season may be moved today.

70.9 Suspension of Standing 31 May, 2012 Order 80(1) 710
Papa Owusu-Ankomahz Mr Speaker, I
beg to second the Motion.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, this is a procedural Motion, so
I will put the Question.
Mr Frederick Opare-Ansah - rose
Mr First Deputy Speaker: You do not
have copies of the Reports?
Mr Opare-Ansah: Mr Speaker, by the
order which permitted the Hon Vice
Chairman to lay the Paper, it was presumed
that there were adequate copies for
distribution.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Yes.
Mr Opare-Ansah: And so, now, we
have started moving in the direction that
presupposes that very soon we will start
debating it and Hon Members still do not
have copies. [lnt"errupti0n.]
Mr First Deputy Speaker: No! Hon
Members, please, this is a serious matter.
Mr Opare-Ansah: Mr Speaker, seeing
that this is a very important Report
covering a gargantuan amount of 2 billion
US dollars --- [Interruptions] - Wabre,
nti yenkofie? (You are tired, so should
we go home?)
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, you are out of order.
Mr Opare-Ansah: Thank you, Mr
Speaker.
Mr Speaker, I was just craving your
indulgence that after the distribution of
the Papers, Hon Members be given some
10 minutes to one hour to even read and
digest the contents, so that they can
adequately contribute in a meaningful
fashion towards the debate that is about
to ensue.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, let me put the Question on the
procedural Motion frst.
Question put and Motion agreed to.
Resolved accordingly.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, has everybody got a copy of
the Report? [Some Hon Members: Yesl]
Hon Members, a lot of consultation has
gone on with regard to this matter. A certain
understanding was reached by the
Committee and the Leadership and that is
why the House was not adjourned to
tomorrow because there is a time element
on this matter. And that is why I was
advised to suspend Sitting.
I believe everybody is tired. I am just
returning from the Appointments
Committee together with a numberiof my
own Hon Colleagues here. It was on the
basis that we would come back and take
this matter that we suspended Sitting.
7.15 p.m. I
Mr Owusu-Agyemang: Mr Speaker, I
believe your suspension of the Sitting at
that time was only because our Hon
Ranking Member, Dr Akoto Osei, sort of
apprised you of what was to be done. I
do not know whether that was an
agreement by the Committee and the
Leadership because our Leader was
sitting here but the Chairman and the Vice
Chairman were not here - '
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member for New Iuaben North, a lot of
consultation has taken place this morning
on this subject matter. I do not want to
mention names. I was involved in those
discussions.

711 3lMay, 2012 712
Mr Owusu-Agyemang: Mr Speaker,
we were about to close. You told us we
were going to close. You said it and Hon
Akoto Osei arrested it
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Yes, it is
true, based on an earlier understanding.
Mr Owusu-Agyemang: Is it the Hon
Ranking Member, the one to do it; is it not
the Hon Chairman of the Committee who
is supposed to do it? Is it the Hon Ranking
Member’s job to do that?
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, he is a member of the Committee
and a Member of this House.
Mr Owusu-Agyemang: Mr Speaker,
the Executive runs the show not the
Opposition.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: .Hon
Members, we now move to item 3 on the
Order Paper Addendum 2.
Receivables-Backed Trade Finance
Facility between Ghana Cocoa Board
and the Consortium of Banks
and Financial Institutions
Vice Chairman of the Committee (Mr
Alfred W G. Abayateye)(0n behalf of the
Chairman of the Committee): Mr Speaker,
I beg to move, that this Honourable
House adopts the Report of the Finance
Committee on the US$2,000,000,000
Receivables-backed Trade Finance
Facility between Ghana Cocoa Board
(COCOBOD) and the consorturn of banks
and financial institutions listed in
Appendizx 1 of the Agreement for the
purchase of cocoa beans in Ghana for the
2011/12 crop season.
Mr Speaker, in doing so, I present the
Committee’s Report.
The Receivables-backed Trade
Finance Facility Agreement between the
Ghana Cocoa Board (COCOBOD) and
the consortium of banks and financial
institutions (listed in Appendix l of the
Agreement) for an amount of two billion
United States dollars (U S$2_,OOO_,0O0,000)
to finance cocoa purchases by the
Ghana Cocoa Board for the 201 l/2012
crop season was laid in the House on
315‘ May, 2012 and referred to the
Finance Committee for consideration
and report.
The Committee met an.d considered
the Agreement with the Hon Minister
for Finance and Economic Planning,
Dr Kwabena Duffuor, the Deputy
Minister for Finance and Economic
Planning, Hon Seth Terkpeh and
officials from the Ministry of Finance
and Economic Planning (MoFEP) and
Ghana Cocoa Board (COCOBOD) and
hereby presents this Report to the
House in accordance with Order 161 (I)
of the Standing Orders of the House.
2.0 Background
The Ghana Cocoa Board contracts
offshore syndicated trade finance
facility annually to finance cocoa
purchases and other payments to
stakeholders, which normally
commences in October of every year.
This financing arrangement has been in
place since I994.
This year, over twenty-seven (27)
international and local banks
(consortium) were involved in arranging
the facility amounting to
US$2,000,000,000.00.
The Agreement on the facility was
signed on Wednesday, 215‘ September,
201 1 in London, United Kingdom.
3.0 Purpose of the Agreement
The purpose of the Agreement is for
the Ghana Cocoa Board to obtain funds
to finance cocoa purchases and other
payments to stakeholders for the 2011/
2012 cocoa season.

713 ‘COCOBOD/Consortium of 31 May, 2012 Banks Trade Finance Facility 714
[MRABAYATEYE]
4.0 Terms of the Credit
The terms of the facility are as follows:
Loan amount - US$2,000,000,000
interest margin A -- LIBOR + 65BPS
Corrrriiimentfees -- 22.8 BPS (0.228 per cent of the
Outstanding balance)
Flat fees (Participation and Arrangement) -- 7 OBPS
Legal fees and other expense --- US$50,334.05
Agency fees - Nil
Security margin - Assignment of Cocoa Contract for 1 10
per cent of Facility Amount
Interest on cash collateral. deposit -- Market related LIBID
(London interbank Bid Rate) V
Underwriting level -- Fully underwritten
5.0 Observations
The Committee noted that sub-
section 8 of section 24 of the Ghana
Cocoa Board Act, 1984 (P.N.D.C.L 81)
provides that "Loans derived whether
from outside or within the Republic as
well as the agreements providing for
joint ventures involving the Board shall
be subject to clause (4) of article 181 of
the Constitution."
The Committee observed that over the
years, the cocoa industry has played a
major role in the economic development
of Ghana. It has continued to play this
role in terms of its contribution to Gross
Domestic Product (GDP), employnient
generation, and as a major source of foreign.
exchange earnings. The sector has also
made substantial contribution to revenue
generation through the payment of
export duty, inter alia.
Cocoa production/purchases for the
20l l/20 l2 cocoa season in respect of which
this stamp duty waiver is sought is expected
to reach 850,000 tonnes at a projected
Free On Board (FOB) price of
US$3 ,3 00.00 per tonne.
The Committee was informed that since
1994, COCOBOD’S performance on the
International Money Market has been
excellent in terms of repayment. Apart
from the 2004/2005 crop season where
COCOBOD did not access the full
amount borrowed, all facilities arranged
have been fully utilized and repayment
requirements met at due dates.
The Committee was informed that the
Facility Agreement requires Ghana Cocoa
Board to take steps to obtain a waiver
of Stamp Duty for the facility by 31" May,
2012.

715 COCOBOD/Consortium of 31 May, 2012 Banks Trade Finance Facility 716
[MRABAYATEYE]
6.0 Conclusion
in view of the above observations,
the Committee recommends to the
House to adopt this Report and approve
by Resolution, the two billion United
States dollar (US$2,000,000,000)
Receivables-backed Trade Finance
Facility between the Ghana Cocoa Board
(COCOBOD) and the consortium of
banks and financial institutions listed
in Appendix 1 of the Agreement for the
purchase of cocoa beans in Ghana for the
2011/2012 crop season in accordance
with article 181 of the 1992 Constitution,
subsection 8 of section 24 of the Ghana
Cocoa Board Act, 1984 (P.N.D.C.L. 81)
and sections 3 and 7 of the Loans Act,
1.970 (Act 335).
Respectfully submitted. _
Papa Owusu-Ankomah (NPP -
Sek0ndi): Mr Speaker, I beg to second
the Motion and to explain that the
Receivables-backed Trade Finance
Facility Agreement, even though it is a
loan, is not guaranteed by the Government
of Ghana. It is backed by cocoa sales that
Cocoa Board will make. So in that sense,
there is no burden on the Consolidated
Fund.
However, over the years, such
Agreements have never been brought to
Parliament. It was last year or over the
past three years, the matter has been raised
that instead of just coming to seek for a
Waiver of the stamp duty on the
Agreement, the Agreement itself should
be brought to Parliament for approval
under article 181 (4) of the Constitution.
This position is strengthened by
section 24 subsection 8 of the Ghana
COCOB OD Act, 1984, which provides that
those derived whether from outside or
Within the Republic as well as the
Agreements providing for joint ventures
involving the Board shall be subject to
clause 4 Of3.I'lI1C16 21 of the Constitution.
--[ Interruption. ]
Mr Owusu-Agyemang: On a point of
order.
Mr Speaker, I do not understand what
the Hon Member for Sekondi is saying,
that this is governed by Cocoa Board
Agreement of 1984 as provided for under
the Constitution. The Constitution is
1992; this is 1984. How did it-
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, there is a Ghana Law Revised
Act and that is why -- The man speaking
is a former Attomey-General and Minister
for Justice. So if you want clarification
iiom him, he will provide it.
Mr Owusu-Agyemang: Mr Speaker,
that is why those of us who are not so-
called "learned" must be told what the
whole thing is about.
7.25 p.m.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Yes, I agree.
Hon Member, he wants you --
Papa Owusu-Ankomal1: Mr Speaker,
the Hon Member for New Iuaben North is
in his sixteenth year in this House and
this House has passed the Statute Law
Revision Act, which appoints a Statute
Law Revision Commissioner, who has the
mandate of reviewing existing laws to
bring them in conformity with the
Constitution and amendments made over
the years.
If we look at Volume 4 of the Laws of
Ghana - [ Interruption. ]
Mr Hackman Owusu-Agyemang -
rose -

717 COCOBOD/Consortium of 3 l May, 2012 Banks Trade Finance Facility 718
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Please,
please, you raised a point. He is trying to
explain it.
Mr Owusu-Agyemang: Mr Speaker,
there is no use referring to me having been
here for 16 years. The important point is
that when you write, you must write
properly and understandably. Do not
assume that people will remember What is
there; that is the wrong way of doing it. It
is not intellectual, it is not academic.
So, let him come back and tell us what it
1s.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, in actual fact, when I also saw
the Report, I thought that we were going
to quote the current title of the Act and
they did not quote it in the Report; they
still quoted the PNDC Law 81. The correct
title of the law now is what the former Hon
Attorney-General and Minister for
Justice, Member for Sekondi has quoted.
S_o, Hon Chairman, you signed the Report,
your Report should have reflected the
current title of the law.
Papa Owusu-Ankomah: Mr Speaker,
the title of the Act is Ghana Cocoa Board
Act, 1984 but the number is PNDC Law
81, because it is revised. That is the title
and that is what I am holding. So, What I
am saying is from the existing law. I
appreciate the difficulty we have but
then because it is a revised Act, you do
not renumber it, you give it the number of
the law as at the time it was enacted.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: The Report
too is correct.
Hon Member for Sekondi, continue;
you have the floor. _
Papa OWusu-Ankomah: Mr Speaker, I
was seeking to explain matters to Hon
Members; that is all I was seeking to do.
This is because, Hon Members were
somehow not understanding what was
happening. They thought they had not
been given adequate notice, so I was just
seeking to explain it. I must apologize if
any Hon Member has taken an offence.
So, Mr Speaker, it is on this basis that
the House is being asked to approve this
Receivable-backed Trade Finance Facility
Agreement. That is what it is, which will
then enable COCOBOD obtain a loan of
US$2,000,000,000 (two billion US dollars)
to purchase cocoa for this season, using
the expected proceeds from the cocoa
sales as security for the repayment.
I thank you, Mr Speaker.
Question proposed
Mr Kwame Osei-Prempeh (NPP -
Nsuta/Kwamang/Beposo): Mr Speaker, I
rise to support the Motion but to make
some few observations.
I thought the Hon Member for Sekondi
was trying to explain to those of us who
are not on the Committee. Perhaps,
matters like interest on cash collateral
deposit, does it mean that COCOBOD is
going to deposit some money? We ought
to know -- "underwriting level", "fully
underwritten". That is the level of
insurance. What is the quantum of
insurance? It is better for the House to
know. Instead of leaving us in the dark,
saying, "fully underwritten", to What
level?
Let me go to page 4 of the
observations. It seems that the Committee
was a bit confused. Paragraph 3,"Cocoa
production/purchase for 2011/2012 cocoa
season, in respect of which this stamp
duty waiver is sought, is expected to reach
850 tonnes". But this Motion is not for
the waiver of stamp duty; it is for the
approval ofthe US$2,000,000,000. So, I
believe that the - [Interruptz'on.] I know.
I am speaking from the Report under
discussion now.
Look at page 4, paragraphs 3, 4 - I
believe that paragraph 5, I believe the
Committee needs to amend this Report
before it is approved. The Observations,
I believe should be in relationship with

719 COCOBOD/Consortium of 31 May, 2012 Banks Trade Finance Facility 720
[MROSEI-PREMPEH]
the other Report for the waiver of the
Stamp Duty and not for this one. Perhaps,
the rush in doing it -
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Where did
they mention Stamp Duty in the paragraph
3 you are referring to of page 4?
Mr Osei-Prempeh: Mr Speaker, it is
paragraph 3 and paragraph 5. I believe
that perhaps, the Hon Chairman needs to
amend the Report. [Interruption] Should
it be here -
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, that Observation is not out of
place; it is only an observation.
Mr Osei-Prempeh: Mr Speaker, no! It
says that we are considering this Report
and it says that cocoa production for
which this Stamp Duty waiver is being
sought --- In this Report, they are not
seeking for Stamp Duty waiver. That
comes under the Report altogether. So, I
believe that he just needs to amend the
Report to remove those things.
Mr Speaker, with this, I support the
Motion.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: He is
referring to a wrong--Hon Member, there
are two Reports.
Papa (),wusu-Ankomah: Mr Speaker, I
believe that the observation of the Hon
Member for Nsuta/Kwamang/Beposo is
right. I think there has been a
transposition. If you look at the 4*‘
paragraph of the second Report, that is
what is supposed to be here and this one
should be there. It is a mistake. It is a
transposition.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member for Sekondi, so can you assist
the House to correct What ought to be
corrected?
Papa Owusu-Ankomah: Mr Speaker, I
would seek the indulgence of the Hon
Chairman and the House, that instead of
cocoa production purchase, er cetera, it
should read as follows:
"Cocoa production/purchase for
the 2011 cocoa season in respect
of which this facility is governed
is expected to reach 850 thousand
tonnes at a projected Free on
Board. . ."
Mr Speaker, I am saying that paragraph
3 should be deleted. Paragraph 2 should
be deleted. I Will leave it at that.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, the paragraph that the Hon
Member for Sekoudi referred to is
accordingly deleted from the Report. Yes,
it ought to.
Mr Kobina T. Hammond: Mr Speaker,
it does not have to be deleted. You are
simply dealing with cocoa production
purchase for 2011/2012 is expected to
reach 850 tonnes. So, that should be there,
that is appropriate, it is direct and then at
the projected whatever. So, it is that
middle section in respect of which Stamp
Duty thing that should go but the rest-- I
mean to indicate what is expected should
be there. It has. So, we know how much
is expected. Is it not? The projected
production - so, you can leave that one.
Papa Owusu-Ankomah: Mr Speaker, I
thought seeking its deletion will make it
simpler. But of course, we could delete
the first and second lines, that is, "in
respect of which this duty waiver is
sought". So that it will read: "cocoa
production/purchase for 2011/2012 is
expected to reach". That is it.
I thank the Hon Member.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, we are deleting "in respect of
which this Stamp Duty Waiver is sought".
The rest of the words remain. That is the
suggestion coming from Hon Members.

721 COCOBOD/Consortium of 31 May, 2012 Banks Trade Finance Facility 722
7.35 p.m.
Mr Opare-Ansah: Mr Speaker, if you
go ahead to keep that level of expected
production, it is a fact known in this House
What the level of production for that period
has been. So are we now expecting it to
plummet down? That is why it is better to
just take it out entirely.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, I would want to get the sense of
the House, especially this is a Committee’s
Report - I would want the Committee to
know What they Want to include or delete
from their Report, then the House can pass
comments on the deletion or otherwise.
Mr Abayateye: Mr Speaker, the
correction we just made, I think is perfect,
it fits in. So if we have this - "cocoa
production/purchases for 201 l/2012
cocoa season is expected to reach 850,000
tonnes at a projected free on board price
of. . ." is all right. An d when we put that in
it, it is expected because in the Agreement,
which we are dealing with, it is there. So if
it reflects in our Report, it is all right.
Mrs Kusi: Mr Speaker, I would want
to find out from the Chairman, why are we
expecting to get to 850,000 tonnes when
we are already at one million tonnes --
[Irlterrupti0ns.] It has even exceeded one
million tonnes according to the State of
the Nation Address.
Alhaji Inusah A. B. Fuseini: Mr
Speaker, I think that basically, that is a
projection for this year and COCOBOD is
expected to project for the season and
they are projecting 850,000 tonnes.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: But the
point the Hon Deputy Minority Whip is
raising is that somewhere along the line,
We were told about one million tonnes.
Why are you revising the projection
downwards - it is a very relevant point
that she has raised?
Alhaji Fuseini: Mr Speaker, the one
million tonnes was for 2010/201 l. But
201 l/2012 is a projection. So yes, we can
say that they are projecting that this year’s
cocoa production will fall below --
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, we are being told that it is a
projection, it is not actual. So that explains
the position. So let us continue.
Alhaj i Fuseini: Mr Speaker, I would
want to effect a consequential
amendment to -
Mr First Deputy Speaker: What
consequential amendment again?
Alhaji Fuseini: Mr Speaker, the Hon
Member for Sekondi has said that
paragraphs 3 and 5 be deleted.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: It is not
paragraph 3, it is starting from (e) of line l
of paragraph 3 and ending at "sought".
Alhaji Fuseini: Yes, but that problem
reoccurs again in paragraph 5.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Paragraph
5 is an observation that at the end of the
day, there will be a waiver of stamp duty.
It is an observation.
Alhaji Fuseini: Very well.
Mr Albert Kan-Dapaah: Mr Speaker,
there are some fundamental issues that
we need to clear with this particular Report
that we have. It used to be the position
that when COCOBOD went for this
Receivables-backed Trade Finance
Facility, they were not bringing the
Agreement to this House. We pointed
out to them that, that was not in
accordance with the Constitution --
Mr First Deputy Speaker: When did
you point out to them?

723 COCOBOD/Consortium of 31 May, 2012 Banks Trade Finance Facility 724
Mr Kan-Dapaah: You said it. In
presenting the Report -- in seconding it,
the Hon Member told us that it was not
the practice to bring it to this House but
the attention of Government and
COCOBOD was drawn to the need for this
Agreement to come here. Good enough.
So today, we have the Agreement here and
I am being called upon as a Member of
Parliament to approve it. I have not seen
it. The Agreement was sent to the Finance
Committee, they used it and they say that
it is all right. They have summarized it in
this Report.
Mr Speaker, this Report, number one,
is full of mistakes; number two, there are
some jargons that I can assure you
nobody understands. Right. And this
practice of the Finance Committee always
going to a meeting, coming up with some
sort of reports and asking me to append
my vote and signature to facilities like this,
is dangerous. If we give approval to this
two billion dollars, can we say to ourselves
that we really understand what we have
done?
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, the point you are raising, in my
opinion, is a very legitimate one but we
fnd ourselves in a difficulty. Since the
coming into force of the 1992 Constitution
and since I have been in this House, this
facility has never come to the House. But
we should commend ourselves as a House
that today it has been laid and we are
making some sort of progress.
The difficulty with us is that before I
suspended the House, the Ranking
Member on the Finance Committeemade
a very important point, that the Hon
Member for New Iuabeng North was
saying that it should have come from the
Majority side and the point he made was
that we need to suspend the House to
come and look at this matter in the national
interest because today is the last day.
If that is not done, there is a cost to
COCOBOD and there is a cost to this
nation. That is why but the point is that
there is victory
- I see it as a victory for this House for
this Agreement coming.
$ince 1993, it has not come -- NDC I,
the NPP and then NDC. So we are looking
at it that it is victory for this House that at
long last they have brought it and we
should be happy that it is here. It has
come and the Finance Committee has
looked at it but for the fact that today is
the deadline - in fact, it has been
extended once already and it is affecting
the credibility of COCOBOD in the
international community and if this is not
done -- [Interruption] in fact, it is in the
Report somewhere - even in this Report,
we are considering. So in the national
interest, let us look at it and build upon it
for the future.
Mr Kan-Dapaah: Mr Speaker, I must
thank you for the explanation that you
have given to us. But for your explanation,
I would have had very serious concerns.
But I have a suggestion for you, Mr
Speaker. '
Mr Speaker, it is a suggestion for the
House for your consideration, since you
have given a ruling --
Mr First Deputy Speaker: It was not
a n1ling-
Mr Kan-Dapaah: I have a suggestion
for the House. Since it has never been the
practice of the House to approve these
facilities and since we have not had time
to study it, let us advise them to do what
they have been doing in previous years
instead of forcing us to do what we do
not understand. -
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, this document has been laid, it
has been referred to the Finance
Committee and they have brought a
Report. I agree with you that we should
not ordinarily have rushed this matter --
but a certain understanding -- in fact,

725 COCOBOD/Consortium of 3 I May, Z012 Banks Trade Finance Facility 726
[MR FIRST DEPUTY SPEAKER]
we have been talking to our ourselves
since morning on this matter. In fact, I
had to make reference to the Hansard of
21$‘ March, 2012 and comments made by
certain Senior Members on this subject
matter. But we have crossed that bridge.
The matter has been laid, Finance
Committee has come to bring a Report, let
us look at it. In future - because the
waiver, which they bring to the House
every year had been brought long ago.
The Finance Committee says that if this is
not brought, they will not produce a
Report.
Now, they have brought it. It is victory
for this House -- that is my view. In the
national interest, let us take it, so that in
subsequent years, we insist that the
Agreement is brought in very good time
for us to digest it, for us to do a more
thorough debate on it and then give
approval.
' In my view, I am happy that there is
victory for the House over this matter.
7.45 p.m.
Mr Owusu-Agyemang: Mr Speaker,
thank you very much; you will win.
[Laughter] .
Mr Speaker, this business of giving
these things to the "princes" of
Parliament, maybe, the Finance Committee
-- the "princes" of Parliament, like
cardinals, are like the "princes" of the
church and colonels are the princes of the
army.
Mr Speaker, next time, the Finance
Committee should not be treated as a
select group of super-intellectuals, super-
people in this place--- [Interruptions]
-- and then be given this.
Mr Speaker, we all need to study the
document and understand it but
everything is given to the Finance
Committee as if We are not Members of
Parliament. Is it only members of Finance
Committee who are Members of
Parliament?
Mr Speaker, everythingis given to the
Finance Committee as if We are not
Members of Parliament. Some of us know
as much as they do, if not more. So
let us --- -
Mr First Deputy Speaker: My
infonnation is that they put the documents
in the pigeonholes. The Table Office has
just informed me that they have sent these
documents to the mails room to be put in
our pigeonholes.
But the point made by Hon Kan-
Dapaah is a very legitimate one. In the
future, the Way we will treat this matter
should be different from the way we are
treating it now.
Mr Opare-Ansah: Mr Speaker, Ithink
We need to put things into perspective,
so that people do not get wrong
impressions about What the Finance
Committee has done. The practice over
the years has been that, this stamp duty
waiver is normally brought to the House
and then they go through the Motions of
making the recommendations.
But at the Committee yesterday, the
Committee insisted that giving that waiver
presupposes that Parliament has already
actually given approval of the Agreement
itself and that is what kick-started the
entire process of coming to lay the
Agreement today, to give us a better
standing on giving that stamp duty
Waiver. So it is not the situation where the
Finance Committee is some super-human
kind of institution --- [Interruptions]
I am a member of the Finance
Committee; it is not the situation that we
are some super-human. It is just that we
were very diligent in the task that this
House entrusted to us and by that
measure, we were able to get more out of
what we were required to do.

727 COCOBOD/Consortium of 31 May, 2012 Banks Trade Finance Facility 728
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, we are debating this matter and
let us make progress.
Hon Members, I will call on the Hon
Member for Manhyia.
Dr Matthew O. Prempeh (NPP --
Manhyia): Mr Speaker, in rising to
support this Motion, I would want the Hon
Deputy Minister for Finance and
Economic Planning, who finds himself
here to explain certain terminology
associated with the loan Agreement. I do
not know how many people in this House
really understand it.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, talk for yourself.
Dr Prempeh: Mr Speaker, I talk for
myself and I listen to the issues around
as well.
Mr Speaker, 22.8 BPS - is it British
Pharmaceutical Society or British
Petroleum Society or what? It has not been
defined-- [Interruption]
Alhaji Inusah A. B. Fuseini -- rose -_
Dr Prempeh: Mr Speaker, if the Hon
Member can sit down and let me finish,
we can make progress.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, continue.
Dr Prempeh: Mr Speaker, this
Agreement was signed as far back as
September, 201l,not eventhis year. I am
not sure the Finance Committee is telling
us that before they went to London to
sign this Agreement, they were shown -
even the leadership of the Finance
Committee were shown a copy of this
Agreement.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, we have just explained the
background leading to this.
Dr Prempeh: Mr Speaker, I am going
on. I am supporting the Agreement. Mr
Speaker, that do es not mean that I cannot
speak to the ills of it. Mr Speaker, you just
talked about the victory for the House but
this, as far as I am concerned, is false
victory. We are being told because of time
duration to pass it and we have agreed
we are going to do that but the
Government should know -
Mr First Deputy Speaker: The victory
is that, this document has been brought
to the House for the first time since the
coming into force of the Fourth Republican
Constitution vis-£1-v is in the face of article
I81 of the Constitution.
Dr Prempeh: Mr Speaker, article 181
was voted by the people of Ghana in a
referendum in 1992, dereliction of duty by
Members of Parliament and now being
corrected is not a victory. I do not want to
sieve it; we have not won any victory.
This is because in the year 2012, we signed
an International Agreement without
Parliament’s involvement. What is the
victory? We have signed a Medical
Agreement with Cuba Without
Parliament’s involvement. What is the
victory?
Mr Speaker, what we are cautioning is
that before they go to London and put
pen to paper, at least, Member of the
House, if not Leadership or Finance
Committee, must be seen to be part of
that process. That is all thatl am talking
about.
So Mr Speaker, it is not only the
responsibility of this House to listen to
its Finance Committee and agree on
things. As of now, they have not defined
"BPS" here, and Mr Speaker, that is my
issue that the Finance Committee is
seeking to go and -
Mr Kan-Dapaah--rose--
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon Kan-
Dapaah, do you have a point of order?

729 COCOBOD/Consortium of 31 May, 2012 Banks Trade Finance Facility 730
Dr Prempeh: He is‘ sitting down, Mr
Speaker. -
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Do you
have a point of order?
Mr Kan-Dapaah: Mr Speaker, Ihave a
point to make but it is not a point of order.
I will rather wait for him to finish, then I
can make a suggestion.
Dr Prempeh: All right. Mr Speaker,
he can give me his suggestion before I
continue. He should give me the
suggestion.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, you are not in charge of
proceedings in this House.
Dr Prempeh: Mr Speaker, I thought
the Standing Orders gave room for the
Hon Member on the floor, if it is not a
point of order, to ask and give room for
his suggestion. Maybe, it would inform
my conclusion. That is all thatl am saying
and not to interrupt the discussion.
Mr Kan-Dapaah: Mr Speaker, in that
case, may I suggest to the House that we
should not deceive ourselves into
thinking that we have seen the Agreement.
But giving the time factor, we should be
able to approve this Report on condition
that copies of the Agreement are made
available to us tomorrow morning.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, the Table Office has infonned me
- [Interruptions] - I have seen the
Agreement. The Table Ofiice has informed
me that the Agreement has been sent to
the mails room and they are in our
pigeonholes. Indeed, I have got a copy of
this Agreement.
Mr Kan-Dapaah: Mr Speaker, that
makes it even serious, that the document
has been sent to the mails room, which
confirms that we have not seen it and yet
we are approving it. So let us assume that
they would distribute it tomorrow.
Dr Prempeh: Mr Speaker, let us take
Hon Kan-Dapaah’s suggestion because
the House has agreed that we are going
to help you pass this Bill. But Mr Speaker,
next year or early this year or late this year,
when they are going to do the next cocoa
season, either they come for the leave of
Madam Speaker, to take certain Members
of the Finance Committee along or bring
the Agreement here for approval before
they go to finalise it - [Interruption]
Papa Owusu-Ankomah: On a point
of order:
Mr Speaker, I am not sure I heard the
Hon Member for Manhyia right, that they
should come and take Hon Members of
the Finance Committee. It is not the
business of Parliament to be part of an
Executive negotiating team; it is not the
business of Parliament and we must all
bear that in mind.
We exercise oversight; we are not part
of the Executive. So when we talk about
negotiation, we cannot be part of a
delegation that is going to negotiate.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, if you are part of the negotiation,
how do you come back to the floor of the
House to effectively oversight what is
clone wherever the syndication takes
place?
Dr Prempeh: Mr Speaker, thank you
for that education.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: That is the
point that the Hon Member for Sekondi is
making.
Dr Prempeh: Mr Speaker, I agree.
Thank you for the elucidation.
We went to Korea on STX before we
came here.
r
!
!

L
\
731 COCOBOD/Consortium of 31 May, 2012 Banks Trade Finance Facility 732
Mr First Deputy Speaker: And what
happ ened?
Dr Prempeh: And what happened?
[Interruptions]
Mr Osei Kyei-Mensah-B0nsu: On a
point of order
Mr Speaker, I did not want to intervene
but I think the current thinking is that
Parliament ought to be involved inthe pre-
budget process everywhere before the
Statement comes to Parliament. So that is,
perhaps, what underpins what my Hon
Colleague is saying. But I will -
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Minority Leader, I agree with you. That is
the practice, especially in the Scandinavia
countries and it is an emerging practice
worldwide. We all know of the emerging
practice. But abudget process is different
from you, sitting down and negotiating
an Agreement and bringing that same
Agreement before the same people who
took part in the negotiation for approval.
That is the point the Hon Member for
Sekondi is making.
But Iagree with you that the pre-
budgeting process is the emerging
practice now in most jurisdictions.
7.55 p.m.
Dr Prempeh: In winding up, Mr
Speaker-
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Your last
sentence, Hon Member for Manhyia.
Dr Prempeh: In conclusion, Mr
Speaker, Hon Members of the committees
are taken to the Spring and Summer
meetings of the International Monetary
Fund (IMF) before loans come to this
House and we have never had a problem.
So this might not bring any problem.
Mr Speaker, it is the right thing to be
done, that the House is involved in early
stage, so that events do not overtake us.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, I will take one more from the
Hon Minority Leader, if he is minded to
contribute, otherwise, I will put the
Question.
Minority Leader (Mr Osei Kyei-
Mensah-Bonsu): Mr Speaker, as various
Hon Members have indicated, I think we
fmd ourselves in some predicament and,
given the exigencies of this time, we must
fmd the way out. I agree that this is the
first time this is happening and we can
work to improve whatever we initiate
today.
Mr Speaker, what we are doing today
is approving of this Agreement and as Hon
Members have already indicated, hitherto,
we have been dealing with the waiver of
Stamp Duty. The import of it was that we
were dealing With, like, a Legislative
Instnnnent (Ll) or a Regulation without
having participated in the crafting of an
Act. So we are saying that the proper
thing to do is to approve of the Agreement
before we go to the next stage, which is
the waiver of Stamp Duty.
So I think We are correct. But being
the first step we may stumble. However, I
believe that as we proceed, we would work
to improve what we are beginning today.
Mr Speaker, the Report on page 4, the
last paragraph under "Observations"
states that:
"The Committee was infonned that
the Facility Agreement requires
Ghana COCOBOD to take steps to
obtain a waiver of Stamp Duty for
the Facility by 31" May, 2012".
That is right. But why are we approving
of this Agreement? I think the Report
ought to have gone further to say that
"For that reason, we need to approve of

733 COCOBOD/Consortium of 31 May, 2012 Banks Trade Finance F acilily 734
[MRKYELMENSAH-B ONSU]
this Parent Agreement"_ When it stops
short, we are not too clear about it. Further
to that, the Report will tell us why it has
become necessary to consider this under
a certificate of urgency. Throughout, there
was nothing in this to indicate to the
House that this is being considered under
a certificate of urgency.
So I would plead with the Committee
to have a look at it and if it is possible, to
have, maybe, a sentence or two --
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Minority Leader, I thought that the
explanations that we have given so far on
the floor of the House, has cured that
defect.
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
that one related to the penultimate
paragraph. I am talking about the last
paragraph and the fact that -
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Yes, even
your own contribution now has cured the
defect in the Committee’s Report.
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
moving on, I thought that we would not
limit ourselves only to clause 4 of article
181. The clause 5 of article 181 is also
relevant, except perhaps, maybe, it may
betray the fact that Parliament has not
acted timely on that. But seriously, maybe,
I think it is also relevant.
Mr Speaker, the attention of this House
has been drawn to the fact that this
Agreement was signed on Wednesday,
21*‘ September, 2011 in London. Indeed,
the Budget Statement which was read to
us - Paragraph 292 of the budget for
2012 provides, and Mr Speaker, with your
kind indulgence, I would want to read:
"Madam Speaker, for the 2012 crop
year, an amount of US$2 billion was
raised in the syndicated loan as
compared with the US$ 1.5 billion
during the 2010 and 2011 cocoa
season."
What it means is that, even before the
budget was read, these things had been
done, and it is not tidy this thing having
been before the budget even came here.
And how many months thereafter? About
eight months? Parliament is now being
called to deal with this. Mr Speaker, it is
most. unfortunate.
However, let us concede that, as I
indicated earlier, it being a first time,
perhaps, we are bound to stumble but let
us Work to improve this, so that the next
time round, it does not happen this way.
Mr Speaker, we are told in the
penultimate paragraph under
"Observations", that cocoa production
purchases for 201 1, 2012 cocoa season. in
respect of which this Stamp Duty Waiver
- of course you have corrected it - is
sourced, is expected to reach 850,000
metric tonnes.
Our attention has been drawn to the
fact that even the usage of the word
"reach" may be out of place because we
were operating at 1.1 million and if we
climb down to 850, we will not say that
we are now "reaching" the place.
"Reaching" means something that is
positive - you ascending. But you are
plummeting. We should concede that and
perhaps, change that word.
Mr Speaker, the relevant issue that I
would want to bring out -- The Hon
Minister for Finance and Economic
Planning himself indicated in this House
that he conceded that cocoa production
would plummet this year to between

735 COCOBOD/Consortium of 31 May, 2012 Banks Trade Finance Facility 736
[MRKYEI-MENSA.H-BONSU]
850,000 and 900,000 metrictonnes. NOW,
this loan is being syndicated for the
production and purchase of 85 0,000 metric
tonnes. What happens if we achieve the
900,00 metric tonnes.
Mr Speakenwhat happens if we achieve
that level? By the calculation, the price is
gone up from US$15 billion to US$2 billion.
Even though production is coming down,
the world market price has shot up. So,
the computation relates to 850,000 metric
tonnes. What if, according to the Hon
Minister for Finance and Economic
Planning himself, we hit the target of
900,000 metric tonnes?
Ithought, maybe, we were going to be
told if it happens that way, maybe,
remedies have been put in place to salvage
that situation. We have no answer to that
possibility. Perhaps, the Deputy Minister
may relate to it in his winding up.
Mr Speaker, these are some of the
critical issues that I thought I felt that we
should draw attention to. Not
withstanding, as I have indicated, even.
though it is not tidy, but because it is the
first time, I believe we may have to work
with it.
That being the case, Mr Speaker, I
would want to support the approval for
this Agreement.
8.05p.1n. ‘
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, that brings us to the end of the
debate.
Hon Deputy Minister, do you want to
say something?
Mr Seth Terkp eh: Mr Speaker, I will
be brief.
I would wish to state that the
Committee was informed about the
excellent performance of COCOBOD in
securing these facilities.
So I would wish to assure the House
that inthe event that COCOBOD needs to
secure more funding when the target is
exceeded, we do not envisage that there
would be much of a problem.
We also think that COCOBOD is able
to make up the difference. I would also
wish for the information of ---
[Interruption]
MrAlbert Kan-Dapaah: On a point of
order.
Mr Speaker, this tendency of
commending ourselves and praising
ourselves when we go for a loan. is wrong.
We should be making money ourselves.
You do not go and borrow and then
congratulate yourself.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, we have always been praising
ourselves. So now, we may have to stop.
We may have to take your advice now
and stop.
Mr Terkpeh: Mr Speaker, I also wish
to explain two points. The "BPs", was
actually explained by the Hon Chairman
ofthe Committee. "BPs" is Basic Points;
it was explained by the Hon Chairman of
the Committee, when he was presenting
the Report.
Also "Undemnitten’° is being used here
with respect to the lead bms underwriting
the facility and it is not in terms of
insurance.
Mr Speaker, with these few Words, I
would wish to thank Hon Members of the
House for staying late and assisting
COCOBOD to meet the deadline.
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
before you put the Question. _
Since this facility has been secured or
has been signed, the Agreement was
signed way back in September. Would

737 COCOBOD/Consortium of 31 May, 2012 Banks Trade Finance Facility 73 8
[MRKYEI-MENSAH-BONSU]
the Hon Minister assure that the
purchasing companies would be paid
early enough? Last year, after we secured
the facility, the purchasing, and they ran
into serious problems, in particular those
of them who had contracted loans from
the banks.
Would he assure that releases would
be made to the purchasing companies
timeously in order to help them sort
themselves out with the various banks?
Mr Terkpeh: Mr Speaker, I wish to give
the assurance that COCOBOD would
endeavour to meet its commitments in a
timely manner provided that the due
diligence that they have to make, and the
fault is not actually that of COCOB OD.
Mr I. K. Asiamah: Mr Speaker, I feel it
should be on record. Where is the Chi.ef
Executive of Ghana COCOBOD? We
cannot find him here. Where is he?
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, I have been informed that the
Chief Executive Off1cer(CEO) is not here
but the Deputy CEO is here.
Mr I. K. Asiamah: But Mr Speaker,
where is the Chief Executive Officer? Is
he undertaking an official assignment?
Mr First Deputy Speaker: That is my
information.
Mr. I. K. Asiamah: Mr Speaker, they
gave you the information but at least, we
shall fmd out a little about where he is, -
- this is an amount of US$2 billion and
the Chief Executive Officer is not here --
[Interruptions] No, I am asking of the
CEO, so that all the comments we have
passed -
We have raised serious and legitimate
concerns, which he should take on board.
After all, he is going to do the execution.
That is my worry, Mr. Speaker.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Very well.
Hon Members, the House has taken note.
Question put and Motion agreed to.
Mr Hammond: Mr Speaker, we do not
understand the "BPs" and those things-
Mr First Deputy Speaker: "Basic
Points".
Mr Hammond: Mr Speaker, he did not
explainthe "Basic Points" business; what
is the "Basic Points"?
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon Deputy
Minister for Finance and Economic
Planning, permission was sought for you
early in the morning, so that you can move
the Consequential Resolution.
RESOLUTIONS
Deputy Minister for Finance and
Economic Planning (Mr Seth Terkpeh)
(on behalf of the Minister for Finance
and Economic Planning): Mr Speaker, I
beg to move, that
WHEREAS by the provisions of
article 181 of the Constitution and
section 7 of the Loans Act, 1970
(Act 335), the terms and conditions
of any loan raised by the
Government of the Republic of
Ghana on behalf of itself or any
public institution or authority shall
not come into operation unless the
said terms and conditions have been
laid before Parliament and approved
by a Resolution of Parliament;
PURSUANT to the provisions of
the said article 181 of the

739 COCOBOD/Consortium of 31 May, 2012 Banks Trade Finance Facility 740
[MRTERKPEH]
Constitution and section 7 of the
Loans Act, 1970 (Act 335), and at
the request of the Government of
the Republic of Ghana, acting
through the Minister responsible
for Finance and Economic Planning,
there has been laid before
Parliament, the terms and conditions
of aUS$2,000,000,0()O Receivables-
backed Trade Finance Facility
between Ghana and financial
institutions listed in Appendix l of
the Agreement for the purchase of
cocoa beans in Ghana for the 2011/
2012 crop season.
THIS HONOURABLE HOUSE
HEREBY RESOLVES AS
FOLLOWS:
IN ACCORDANCE with the
provisions of the said article 181 of
the Constitution and section 7 of
the Loans Act, 1970 (Act 335), this
House approves the
US$2,000,000,000 Receivables-
backed Trade Finance Facility
between Ghana Cocoa Board
(COCOBOD) and the consortium of
banks and financial institutions
listed in Appendix 1 of the
Agreement for the purchase of
cocoa beans in Ghana for the 201 1/
2012 crop season.
Mr Alfred W. G. Abayateye: Mr
Speaker, I beg to second the Resolution.
Question prop osed
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsuz Mr Speaker,
the Chairman cannot second the
Resolution. He can only rise to second
the Motion for the adoption of the
Resolution.
Mr Abayateye: Mr Speaker, Ibeg to
second the Motion for the adoption of
the Resolution. -
Question put and Motion agreed to.
Resolved accordingly.
Mr Hammond: Mr Speaker, the
substantive Motion for the rescission -
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member, you have not caught my eye. You
are totally out of order.
Mr Gbediame: Mr Speaker, we will
move to the firstAa’dendum. The Hon Vice-
Chainnan would -
PAPERS
By the Vice Chairman of the
Committee (Mr Abayateye on behab’ of
the Chairman) --
Report of the Finance Committee on
the request for waiver of Stamp
Duty on Offshore Syndicated
Receivables-backed Trade Finance
Facility amounting to
US$2,000,000,000 fortheyear2011/
2012 cocoa purchases by Ghana
Cocoa Board.
First Deputy Speaker: Hon Members,
We move to item number 3 on the
Addendum Order Paper.
8.15 p.m.
Suspension of Standing
Order 80 (1)
Vice Chairman of the Finance
Committee (Mr Alfred W. G.
Abayateye)(0n behalf of the Chairman of
the Committee): Mr Speaker, Ibeg to
move, that notwithstanding the provisions
of Standing Order 80 (1), which require
that no Motion shall be debated until at
least, forty-eight hours have elapsed
between the date on which the notice of
the Motion is given and the date on which
the Motion is moved, the Motion for the

741 Suspension of Standing Order 80(1) 31 May, 2012 742
[MR ABAYATEYB]
adoption of the Report of the Finance
Committee on the request for Waiver of
Stamp Duty on Offshore Syndicated
Receivables-backed Trade Finance
Facility amounting to US$2,000,000,000.00
for the year 2011/2012 cocoa purchases
by Ghana Cocoa Board may be moved
today.
Papa Owusu-Ankomah: Mr Speaker,
I beg to second the Motion.
Question put and Motion agreed to.
Resolved accordingly.
Waiver of Stamp Duty on offshore
Syndicated Receivables-backed Trade
Finance Facility
Vice Chairman of the Finance
Committee (MrALfred W. G. Abayateye)
(on behab’ of the Chairman): Mr Speaker,
I beg to move, that this Honourable House
adopts the Report of the Finance
Committee on the request for Waiver of
Stamp Duty on Offshore Syndicated
Receivable-b acked Trade Finance Facility
amounting to US$2,000,000,000. 00 for the
year 201 1/20 12 cocoa purchases by Ghana
Cocoa Board.
1.0 Introduction
The request for the waiver of Stamp
Duty on the Offshore Syndicated
Receivables-backed Trade Finance
Facility amounting to two billion United
States dollars (US$2,000,000,000) for the
year 2011/20 12 cocoa purchases by
Ghana Cocoa Board was laid in the House
on 22'" March, 2012 and referred to the
Finance Committee for consideration
and report in accordance with article 174
(2) of the Constitution and Standing
Orders of the House.
ln its deliberation on the request, the
Committee met with the Hon Minister for
Finance and Economic Planning and the
Deputy Minister for Finance and Economic
Planning, Hon Seth Emmanuel Terkpeh,
Officials from the Ghana Cocoa Board and
the Ministry of Finance and Economic
Planning and hereby present this Report
to the House.
20 Background
The Ghana Cocoa Board contracts
offshore syndicated trade finance facility
annually to finance cocoa purchases and
other payments to stakeholders, which
normally commenceinOctoberofeve.1yyear.
This financing anangementhas been in place
since 1994.
This year, over twenty-seven (27)
international and local banks (consortium)
were involved in arranging the facility
amounting to US$2,000,000,000.00.
The Agreement on the facility was
signed on Wednesday, 2 l "Septern bet, 201 1
in London, United Kingdom.
3.0 Stamp Duty
Section 32(6) of the Stamp Duty Act, 2005
(Act 689) mandates that for documents to
be executable, valid and enforceable in
Ghana, such documents would have to be
stamped.
However, the Commissioner of lntemal
Revenue (Commissioner General of the
Ghana Revenue Authority) is empowered
under sections 158(2) and ll3(4) of the
Internal Revenue Act, 2000 (A ct 5 9 1) to
waive Stamp Duty subject to approval
by Parliament
4.0 Total waiver
The total Stamp Duty to be waived on
all the documents covering the facility is
1
I
I
.
I
:
l
I

743 Waiver of Stamp Duly on Trade 31 May, 2012 Finance Facility 744
[MRABAYATEYE]
twenty million dollars (U S$20,000,000.00),
thus lpercent of US$2,000,000,000.00
Attachment: Please find attached,
a letter from the Commissioner of the
Domestic Tax Revenue Division (DTRD) of
the Ghana Revenue Authority, providing the
computation. of the Stamp Duty payable.
5.0 Observations
The Committee was informed that the
Loan Agreement requires Ghana Cocoa
Board to take steps to obtain a waiver
of Stamp Duty for the facility by 315‘ May,
2012,
The Committee was further informed
that the Minister for Finance and
Economic Planning, in consultation with
the Commissioner of the Domestic Tax
Revenue Division of the Ghana
Revenue Authority and acting in
accordance with section 36 ofthe Stamp
Duty Act, 2005 (Act 689) and sections
158 (2) and l l3 (4) of the Internal
Revenue Act, 2000 (Act 592) has given
an interim waiver of the Stamp Duty on
the facility, subject to approval by
Parliament.
The Committee took note of the fact
that over the years, the cocoa industry
has played a major role in the economic
development of Ghana. it has continued
to play this role in terms of its
contribution to Gross Domestic Product
(GDP), employment generation, and as
a major source of foreign exchange
earnings. The sector has also made
substantial contribution to revenue
generation through the payment of
export duty, inter alia.
Cocoa production/purchases for the
2011/2012 cocoa season in respect of
which. this stamp duty waiver is sought,
is expected to reach 850,000 tonnes at a
projected Free On Board (FOB) price of
US$3,300.00 per tonne.
The Committee was informed that
since 1994, COCOBOD’s performance on
the International Money Market has
been excellent in terms of repayment.
Apart from the 2004/2005 crop season,
where COCOBOD did not access the full
amount borrowed, all facilities arranged
have been fully utilised and repayment
requirements met at due dates.
6.0 Conctusion
After carefully examining the request and
satisfying itself of the key role played by
the Ghana Cocoa Board in the c0untry’s
economy and the strategic nature of the
facility to Ghana Cocoa Board’s
operations, the Committee recommends
to the House to approve the waiver of Stamp
Duty of l per cent, amounting to twenty
million United States ' dollars
(US$20,000,000.00) on the Offshore
Syndicated Receivables-backed Trade
Finance Facility totalling two billion United
States dollars (US$2,000_,0O0,000.00) for the
year 201 l/2012 cocoa purchases by Ghana
Cocoa Board in accordance with article
174 (2) of the 1992 Constitution, sections
l58 (2) and l 13 (4) of the Internal Revenue
Act, 2000 (Act 592) and section 36 of the
Stamp DutyAct, 2005 (Act 689).

745 Waiver 0fStamp Duty on Trade 31 May, 2012 Finance Facility
[MRABAYATEYE]
i <;HAi\§.1}\ RE\fEN'UE-AUTHORITY
,?
. - 
In case ofreply the
G
The Hon. Minister,   H V
Ministry of Finarice & Ecdgbirgwic Pia-nning,
P. Oi.'Box MB 4_0,V -5; - --
Accra. ' ,
='!1.fl-.-I= *
1.7-:-1 |\-.ru<
DearS_ir,'_ :1‘ - ’- - _ _
SYNDIQATED 'LCj)AN_ AGRi§Ep.gENT RELATI
RE-.C-EvIVAB"LES - BACKEE)_i<T}i_K'F\%D'E FINANCE
/Y
I?
4- ‘Q? '
3%
‘ - December 20, 2011
-25-
NGTO A us$2,q00,_oo0,'QQo.o0
mciuw DATEDSEPTEMBER 21, 2011 -
‘REQUEST FOR ASSESSMEN ‘AND INTERIM W‘Al\/ER OF PAYMENT -- - ' '
T .
OF STA'MP- DUTY ' F '; ' - _
§§;;.|-\-
Wé. refer to. \‘/our letter RE rence SA/MOFEP/COCOBOD/O45 dated Décémber 15, 2011
. fie. Y
on the above su?-bject. -  _ ’ .
The stamp duty-payable q.n:US"$2,0_O0,0100,-000.00 i's_US$20,'OO0,000.00'. _
. . .- .
. _ x
That is us$2,0ob,0o0,ooCi;@"-1%‘ :-
7 ,
The idterim 'wai\}er on tigfie; gzssesfiéd siampduty dn the Tradé Finance-Faciiity pending
the appr6\/a1'o'.f ParIi2a_m@§"P;‘is as 'réqUi§red under Sectioh,  of the Stamp Quty'A¢t, A_ct
689 a *= ' ‘ -
Y -.-.1 _ 1.
5 A
pg - .
;fi)1v::¢¢_$-I-1':-:F1!
_.._.II_L"I;l'i1"_':-
2 ' --
Yourls faithfully,
-for: ’CQ'MMi-S:S’IONE - ERALJ. 
. _= , I‘; 1 - , .
MRS. _C(_)i\/IFORT BOOi§lENEi%,S§lXF'O, ..
AG. ',CQI§/W/1]SS’lQ'N_ER§' ="- IDT-Rlfi .
. i. - - -' . ' k
mk
=- _- us$20,00O,oo0.'00
. 4 , '
-
1
x
746
 *3" ff‘ fh c"  "f
number and dale ofthe  1 V 4. .-_ O ‘Ce O_ t  ommlsslonjar
Iettershouldbe quoted 5. V  -'_. ‘- . Domestic Tax-Revenue Division,
.  3 "<%,_ - J . . '
Our Ref.N0.‘ ' -  l -  . \. éi P' O‘ Box 27-'02‘ _ ‘ '
Your Ref. No_ -  . ' """:_'_ ,  ' Accra - Ghana‘
Tel..No. 0302 é1s114 5- I ‘ _ ‘
- " .\ - -‘<7  1 ' .
Fax N0. . 0302 as 511 3::  .,_ _ _ {/7-H.OR\

747 Waiver of Stamp Duty on Trade 3 1 May, 2012 Finance Facility 748
Papa Owusu-Ankomah (NPP --
Sekondi): Mr Speaker, I beg to second
the Motion and to state that the waiver of
stamp duty makes eminent financial sense.
This is because if it is not waived, it means
COCOBOD, that is, the Government and
the people of Ghana must pay US$20
million to itself as stamp duty --
[lnterruption] - Yes. I beg to second
the Motion. [Interruption] That is what
it means.
Before the document even becomes
valid in Ghana, we must pay a stamp duty
of one per cent- and in this case [An Hon
Member: To who?] -To the Government
of Ghana.
So I am saying that -[Interrupti0n]
- That is what I have said, that it does
not make sense for COCOBOD to be
paying US$20 million to the Commissioner
of Internal Revenue; that is it. S0 it is the
same thing.
Question proposed
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, most of the issues that we have
to raise in this matter have been raised in
the main Motion dealing with the
US$2,000,000,000.00. So I will take a
limited nmnber of contributions from Hon
Members on this.
Mr Albert Kan-Dapaah (NPP -
Afigya-Sekyere West): Mr Speaker, I
just Wanted a clarification. This is because
in seconding the Motion, the point was
made that it does not make sense for
COCOBOD to pay taxes to the
Government of Ghana.
Ghana COCOBOD is a commercial
entity. What is wrong with Ghana
COCOBOD paying taxes to the Republic
of Ghana? In fact, Mr Speaker, we should
be encouraging this.
They would be paying interest to
outside bodies, to the banks. As for that,
there is nothing wrong with it. But the
small taxes that it would be paying to the
Government of Ghana -- [An Hon
Member: US$20 1nillion?] Yes. The
principle Mr Speaker, is wrong and it is
wrong and should never be supported by
this House -
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, do we not benefit as a
government or as a people from the cocoa
sales?
Hon Member for Sekondi, let me hear
from you, then the Hon Deputy Minister.
Papa Owusu-Ankomahz Mr Speaker,
I think I would leave the Hon Deputy
Minister who is representing Government
to answer.
Mr Terkpeh: Mr Speaker, I would
wish to explain, for the avoidance of
doubt, that COCOB OD contributes to the
budget In fact, when we refer to cocoa
roads, for example, the source of the funds
is from COCOBOD. And for some time
now, COCOBOD was among the few
institutions that paid export duty.
Therefore, I think if We view this in net
tenns, we would realise that COCOBOD
makes a contribution, which could have
come in lieu of taxes.
Having said that, I do agree with my
Hon Senior Colleague that we should
encourage our State-owned enterprises,
some, which are on Government subsidy,
to rather pay dividends and taxes to the
Government.
That notwithstanding, Ijust wanted to
state for the record that COCOBOD is
doing this and, indeed, one can even
argue that the scholarship scheme is in
lieu of taxes.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Deputy Minister, What is our benefit for
waiving the tax? That is what Hon
Members want to know. What is our
benefit, which is making us waive the one

749 Waiver of Stamp Duty on 3l May, 2012 Trade Finance Facility 750
[MRFIRST DEPUI Y SPEAKER]
per cent tax which is US$20 million, put in
another way? That is the question.
Papa Owusu-Ankomah: Mr Speaker,
if we pay the tax, What it means is that we
would take US$2,000,000,000.00 less
US$20 million, which is the stamp duty.
That is what it means.
Mr Kan-Dapaah: But Mr Speaker, that
is exactly what it should be. It is not the
same thing when I run my business and
make a huge profit and say that instead of
paying taxes, I am going to use it to offer
scholarships. I have not paid my taxes.
The money should be given to
Govemment. If it has to be surrendered to
Ghana COCOB OD, that is another thing.
But in principle, we have said that we
want the State-owned enterprises to
become commercial entities. That was why
we migrated them from corporations to
limited liability companies. So when they
make money, let them pay taxes to
Government. [Interruption] Yes.
8.25 p.m.
AlhajiM0hammed-MubarakMuntaka
(NDC -AsaWase): Mr Speaker, I rise to
support the Motion, and in doing so,
agree with my Colleague, Hon Kan-
Dapaah.
Mr Speaker, it is true that COCOBOD
is a fully Government-owned company and
it is true that if this is waived -
[Interruption]
Mr I. K. Asiamah: On a point of order.
Mr Speaker, just a clarification from my
Hon Colleague. I am told that he used to
be a purchasing clerk. Is thattrue or false?
[Laughter]
Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, Iwish
to say to my Hon Colleague that, I was far
away from being a purchasing clerk. From
purchasing clerk, you get to a District
Manager, you go to an Area Manager,
then you come to Operations Manager. I
was an Operations Manager for the
company that I was working for.
[Interruptions] Yes.
Mr Speaker, the only disadvantage is
that the amount of money that would be
available for the licensed buying
companies to be able to borrow from
COCOBOD to enhance their operations,
would be US$20 million -- [Interruption]
Mr Hammond: On a point of order.
Mr Speaker, for the sake of
completeness, now that we know the rank
that he reached, at which cocoa depot did
he work?
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon K. T.
Hammond, you are out of order.
Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, the
disadvantage to COCOB OD would be that
they would have the money, less the
US$20 million, which they could use to
enhance the operations of the licensed
buying company.
In Ghana, COCOBOD itself does not
engage in direct purchase; it does this
through the licensed buying companies
like Adwumapa, the Kuapa and the like.
So if you take the money upfront, what is
going to happen is that, it is just like
capital, they would be deficient in how far
they could go.
I would want to agree that we need to
fmd another way of making sure that at
the end of the annual operations that
money is paid into the Consolidated Fund.
This is because Mr Speaker, it is just like
you owning a company. The company
could be growing bigger but once the
dividend is not coming into your accounts
- It would be in your name; this
company is yours, the company is big,
but you may not directly be influencing
the resources in there.

751 Waiver of Stamp Duly on Trade 31 May, 2012 Finance Facility 752
[ALHAJI MUN TAKA]
I must say, Mr Speaker, that it is
irnportant that we take note of this because
at the end of the day, all those moneys
and the profit that would be earned, end
up as bonuses to senior managers. This
is per how much money you are able to
make, you would end up --
[In terruptiolt]
Dr Appiah-Kubi: On a point of order.
My Hon Colleague is misleading the
House. It is not all moneys or profits that
are made by the COCOBOD that end up in
the pockets of managers. Indeed, cocoa
is the only product, on which export taxes,
which go to the Government are
calculated. The Government also earns a
lot of money in the form of export taxes.
So it is not true that COCOBOD does not
make profit or does not pay taxes.
Mr Terkpeh: Mr Speaker, I would also
wish to add that COCOBOD’s budget is
actually approved by the Hon Minister
for Finance and Economic Planning. Also
for the records, COCOBOD is expressly
exempted from the payment of income
taxes. That is why I made the point that it
makes other contributions which are
positive to the budget.
Alhaji Muntaka: Mr Speaker, in
conclusion, I am saying this as a fact,
because Ihave been in the industry. If
you finish an operation, some percentage
of your profit, depending on how far you
go, is calculated and paid as bonuses to
the workers. It is good. But because you
are leaving all these moneys in there -
Mr Speaker, I am sorry to say, many
people who are working in the cocoa
industry earn far more than even the
President of the country. I am not saying
it is bad but the benefits should be shared
with the State that owns COCOBOD. That
is why We need to find an arrangement
that would allow them to use it to work
but also pay that money into the
Consolidated Fund, which could be
used for other programmes. It is good,
just like he is saying that the Cocoa
Scholarships-
We are talking about the cocoa roads.
But Mr Speaker, the Hon Deputy Minister
is aware that annually, they go and sit
down and share the freight on board
(FOB) in a way that they would reserve
some for scholarships, they would reserve
some for roads and other things, which is
good. But I think that we need to find a
way of taking this money to strengthen
the Consolidated Fund.
Having said this, this is not the time to
say we should stop waiving this. Let us
go ahead and give the waiver but in future,
let us see how we would put more money
into. the Consolidated Fund, which we
control better.
Mrs Frema Osei-Opare-rose -
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Yes, gender.
Mrs Akosua Frema Osei-Opare (NPP
-Ayawaso West Wuogon): Mr Speaker,
yes, for gender balance; but I am speaking
as the Hon Ranking Member for the
Committee on Employment, Social Welfare
and State Enterprises, which has an
oversight responsibility on State
enterprises. Even though the Finance
Committee seems to have consumed
COCOBOD, it is actually by our Standing
Orders under our Committee.
Mr Speaker, I think it is important for
us to examine the viability of COCOBOD
because that is part of the business of
this Committee, that we must know that
they are operating on sound business
principles. _
Mr Speaker, there are other schools of
thought that CO COB OD should liberalise
the external marketing of cocoa. In the"

753 Waiver of Stamp Duty on Trade 31 May, 20 I2 _ Finance Facility 754
[MRS OSELOPARE]
past, I have had an experience working to
support Kuapa Cocoa Limited and I know
that when they liberalised the internal
marketing of cocoa, there were lots of
pressure from abroad, that We should also
push for the liberalisation of the e>:ternal
market, which some of us vehemently
opposed. This is because we felt that
Cocoa Marketing Company was doing so
well on the international market and that
there was a need to protect that enterprise.
Now, I know that there is still pressure
for the liberalisation of the external
marketing of cocoa. Therefore, it is
important for us as a country, to satisfy
ourselves that the decisions we are
making towards COCOBOD, still holding
the monopoly of the external market, are
still a more viable option than liberalising
it. That is why, all the loans that they
take, we must really now begin to let them
operate as a proper business, so that We
satisfy ourselves that, perhaps, we can
earn more if we allow them to be one of
the buyers or we would not eam so much.
But as a business, I think the time has
come for us to scrutinise COCOB OD’s
operations. I am putting this on the table
for our Committee to look into it and make
some recommendations in that light.
Prof. A.meyaw-Aku1nfi --- rose --
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Member for Techiman North, do you have
a point of order? [Pause]
Hon Members, that brings us to the
end of the debate.
Hon Minority Leader, do you have
something to say? [Pause] Very well.
Hon Members, that brings us to the
end of the debate.
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu -rose-
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Minority Leader, you know I always give
you special - I gave it to you and you
said, "no". Or you have been infected by
your Chief Whip?
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
when I raised the matter relating to what
happens if we attain 900,000 metric tonnes,
the Hon Deputy Minister assured that
some arrangements could be made and
that, maybe, they would come back. But I
just noticed that even doing the
computation, at 3,300 per tonne, 85 0,000
metric tonnes would take us to about
US$28 billion; there is then a gap. So
what happens?
Mr First Deputy Speaker: These are
projections. What happens? If it is more
than the US$2 billion here, how do you
nonnally treat it in your books? How do
they treat it? That is what the Hon Minority
Leader wants to know.
Mr Terkp eh: Mr Speaker, the question
is very specific, and therefore, I would
crave your indulgence -
Mr First Deputy Speaker: No! It is
not a specific question. What is the normal
practice? I believe there should be a
normal practice. You project something,
you get something more than what you
projected; how do you nonnally treat it?
I know that naturally, it goes to
COCOBOD.
Mr Kan-Dap aah -- rose -
8.35 p.m.
Mr Kan-Dapaah: Mr Speaker, this
Resolution limits us to a certain amount;
we cannot go beyond it. They cannot.

755 Waiver of Stamp Duty on Trade 3 l May, 2012 Finance Facility 75 6
Mr First Deputy Speaker: No! He is
talking in terms of where you get more
than --
Mr Kan-Dapaah: You get more? Mr
Speaker, the facility is for US$2 billion;
you cannot get more than that. But if it
becomes necessary to get more than US$2
billion -- Is that your question?
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
the response of the Hon Deputy Minister,
when I asked that if we exceeded 850,000
metric tonnes, he said, in that case, they
may have to come back for Parliament to
maybe, approve of --
Mr First Deputy Sp eaker: No! Who
would they come to?
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsuz Mr Speaker,
I am saying that even the 850,000 metric
tonnes was their own estimated price of
US$3 ,3 00 dollars per tonne -
Mr First Deputy Speaker: The US$12
billion is money being raised to finance
the purchases of cocoa. But whatever
they get, is the surplus and it goes -
Mr Kyei-Mensah-Bonsu: Mr Speaker,
I am saying that even the 850,000 metric
tonnes, if we raise US$32 billion, it would
not be adequate to purchase the 850,000
metric tonnes -- because at US$3,3 00, it
Works up to US$28 -
Mr Kan-D apaah --rose --
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Let me hear
from the Hon Kan-Dapaah.
Mr Kan-Dapaah: Mr Speaker, this is a
facility -- whatever money they have. So
they have made their calculations and
know that, "This is how much we want".
The presumption is that they have some
money already.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Very well.
Papa Owusu-Ankomah: Mr Speaker,
the US$2 billion would not be expended
in one day. It is spread over a period. So
as you export and you earn some revenue,
you nun the money round. It is just like
an overdraft facility; it is over a period
[ Interruptz‘on]- I am a cocoa farmer.
Mr Terkpeh: Mr Speaker, we also
know that COCOBOD issues local bonds
and COCOBOD has other sources for
financing cocoa purchases. So this is just
one out of the other means which it
uses -
Mr First Deputy Speaker: That
explains the matter.
Question put and Motion agreed to.
RESOLUTIONS
Waiver of Stamp Duty on Offshore
Syndicated Receivables-backed Trade
Finance Facility
Deputy Minister for Finance and
Economic Planning (Mr Seth
Terkpeh)(0n behalf of the Minister for
Finance and Economic Planning): Mr
Speaker, I beg to move, that
WHEREAS By the provisions of
article 174 (2) of the Constitution,
Parliament is empowered to confer
power on any person or authority
to waive or vary a tax imposed by
anAct of Parliament;
THE EXERCISE of any power
conferred on any person or
authority to waive or vary a tax in
favour of any person or authority is
by the said provisions made subject
to the prior approval of Parliament
by resolution;
BY THE combined operation of the
provisions of section 26 (2) of the

757 Vltliver of Stamp Duties on Trade 31 May, 2012 Finance Facility 75 8
[MRTERKPEH]
Customs, Excise and Preventive
Service (Management) Law, I993
(PNDCL 330), the Export and Import
Act, 1995 (Act 503), the Export
Development and Investment Fund
Act, 2000 (Act5 82), the Value Added
Tax Act, 1998 (Act 546), the Value
Added Tax (Amendment) Act, 2000
(Act 579) and other existing laws
and regulations applicable to the
collection of customs duties and
other taxes on the importation of
goods into Ghana, the Minister for
Finance and Economic Planning
may exempt any statutory
corporation, institution or individual
from the payment of duties and taxes
otherwise, payable under the said
' laws and regulations or waive or
vary the requirement of such
statutory corporation, institution or
individual to pay such duties and
taxes;
IN ACCORDANCE with the
provisions of the Constitution and
at the request of the Government of
Ghana, acting through the Minister
responsible for Finance and
Economic Planning, there has been
laid before Parliament, a request by
the Minister for Finance and
Economic Planning for the prior
approval of Parliament, the exercise
by him of his power under the laws
and regulations relating to the
waiver and exemption of duties and
taxes amounting to
US$2,000,000,000.00 associated with
the cocoa purchases by Ghana
Cocoa Board for the year 201 l/20 12.
NOW THEREFORE, this
Honourable House hereby
approves the exercise by the
Minister responsible for Finance
and Economic Planning of the
power granted to him by Parliament
by Statute to waive such taxes and
duties or to exempt the payment of
duties and taxes amounting to
US$2,000,000,000.00 associatedwilh
the cocoa purchases by Ghana
Cocoa Board fortheyear 2011/2012.
Mr Alfred W. G. Abayateye: Mr
Speaker, I beg to second the Motion for
the adoption of the Resolution.
Question proposed
Mr Opare-Ansah: Mr Speaker, Ibeg
to notice that the House seems --
[Interruption]
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, this is a consequential
Resolution--
Mr Opare-Ansah: Mr Speaker, I
thought you had given me the floor.
Question put and Motion agreed to.
Resolved accordingly.
Mr First Deputy Speaker: Hon
Members, that brings us to the end of
today°s business.
I thank you very much for your support
and co-oporation.
On that note, the House is adjourned
till tomorrow at 10 o’ clock in the forenoon.
Thank you very much.
ADJOURNMENT
The House was aafiourned at 8.40 p. m.
till Friday, 1*’ June, 2012 at 10.00 a.m.
l
1*
4
i
‘v


K Q ‘ ‘  
‘L If‘ '__ I:

